INDEX 
The Inter-state Migrant Workmen 
(regulation Of Employment And Conditions Of Service) Act, 
1979 
 
Section Particulars 
 
1 
Introduction 
 
 
 
CH. I PRELIMINARY 
1. 
Short title, extent, commencement and application. 
2.
Definitions.
 
CH. II REGISTRATION OF ESTABLISHMENT EMPLOYING INTER-STATE 
MIGRANT WORKMEN 
3. 
Appointment of registering officers. 
4.
Registration of certain establishments.
5.
Revocation of registration in certain cases.
6.
Prohibition against employment of inter-State
migrant workmen without registration. 
7.
Appointment of licenceship officers.
8.
Licensing of contractors.
9.
Grant of licences.
10.
Revocation, suspension and amendment of licences.
11.
Appeal.
CH. IV DUTIES AND OBLIGATIONS OF CONTRACTORS 
12. 
Duties of contractors. 
 
 
CH. V WAGES WELFARE AND OTHER FACILITIES TO BE PROVIDED TO INTER- 
STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN 
 
 
13. 
Wage rates and other conditions of service 
of inter-State migrant workmen.
14.
Displacement allowance.
15.
Journey allowance etc.
16.
Other facilities.
17.
Responsibility for payment of wages.
18.
Liability of principal employer in certain cases.
19.
Past liabilities.
 
 
 
 

20.
Inspectors.
 
CH.VII MISCELLANEOUS 
 
21. 
Inter-State migrant workmen to be deemed to be in 
employment from date of recruitment for the purposes 
of certain enactments. 
22.
Provisions regarding industrial disputes in relation
to inter-State migrant workmen.
23.
Registers and other records to be maintained.
24.
Obstructions.
25.
Contravention of provisions regarding employment
of inter-State migrant workmen.
26.
Other offences.
27.
Offences by companies.
28.
Cognizance of offences.
29.
Limitation of prosecutions.
30.
Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with the Act.
31.
Power to exempt in special cases.
32.
Protection of action taken under Act.
33.
Power to give directions.
34.
Power to remove difficulties.
35.
Power to make rules.
36.
Repeals and saving.
 
 
 

The Inter-State Migrant Workmen Act, 1979 
 
THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN 
(REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT AND 
CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) ACT, 1979 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
In Orissa and in some other States the system of employment of Inter-State 
migrant labour known as Dadan Labour is in vogue. In Orissa Dadan Labour is 
recruited from various parts of the State through contractors or agents called Sardars 
or Khatadars for work outside the State in large construction projects. At the time 
of recruitment Sardars or Khatadars promise that wages calculated in piece-rate 
basis would be settled every month but usually this promise is never kept. Once the 
worker comes under the clutches of the contractor, he takes him to a far-off place 
on payment of railway fare only. No working hours are fixed for these workers and 
they have to work on all the days in a week under extremely bad working conditions. 
The provisions of the various labour laws are not being observed in their case and 
they are subjected to various mal practices. The question of protection and welfare 
of Dadan Labour was considered by the Twenty- eighth Session of the Labour 
Ministers’ Conference held on 26th October, 1976 at New Delhi. It was recommended 
to set up a Compact Committee to go into the whole question and to suggest measures 
for eliminating the abuses prevalent in the system. Accordingly in February, 1977 
the Compact Committee was constituted and it recommended, inter alia, that a 
separate Central legislation may be enacted to regulate the employment of inter- 
State migrant workmen as it was felt that the provisions of the Contract Labour 
(Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970, even after necessary amend-ments, would not 
adequately take care of the variety of mal practices indulged in by the contractors, 
Sardars or Khatadars. The recommendations of the Compact Committee were 
examined in consultation with the State Governments and the Ministries in the 
Government of India. Accordingly the Inter-State. Migrant Workmen (Regulation 
of Employment and Conditions of Service) Bill, 1979 was introduced in the Parliament. 
 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTSAND REASONS 
The system of employment of inter-State migrant labour (known in Orissa as 
Dadan Labour) is an exploitative system prevalent in Orissa and in some other 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
States. In Orissa, Dadan Labour is recruited from various parts of the State through 
contractors or agents called Sardars/Khatadars for work outside the State in large 
construction projects. This system lends itself to various abuses. Though the Sardars 
promise at the time of recruitment that wages calculated on piece-rate basis would 
be settled every month, the promise isnot usually kept. Once the worker comes 
under the clutches of the contractor, he takes him to a far-off place on payment of 
railway fare only. No working hours are fixed for these workers and they have to 
work on all the days in a week under extremely bad working conditions. The provisions 
of the various labour laws are not being observed in their case and they are subjected 
to various malpractices. 
2. 
The Twenty-eighth Session of the ‘Labour Ministers’ Conference (New 
Delhi, October 26,1976) which considered the question ofprotection and welfare of 
Dadan Labour recommended the setting up of a small Compact Committee to go 
into the whole question and to suggest measures for eliminating the abuses prevalent 
in this system. The inter-State migrant workmen are generally illiterate, unorganised 
and have normally to work under extremely adverse conditions and in view of these 
hardships, some administrative and legislative arrangements both in the State from 
where they are recruited and also in the State where they are engaged for work are 
necessary to secure effective protection against their exploitation. The Compact 
Committee which was constituted in February, 1977, therefore, recommended the 
enactment of a separate Central legislation to regulate the employment of inter- 
State migrant workmen as it was felt that the provisions of the Contract Labour 
(Regulation and Abolition ) Act, 1970, even after necessary amendments would not 
adequately take care of the variety of malpractices indulged in by the contractors/ 
Sardars/ Khatadars, etc., and the facilities required to be provided to these workmen 
in view of the peculiar circumstances in which they have to work. 
3. 
The recommendations of the Compact Committee have been examined 
in consulta-tion with the State Governments and the Ministries of the Government 
of India and the suggestions made by them have been taken into account in formulating 
the proposals for legislation. The main features of the Bill are as follows : 
(i) The proposed legislation will apply to every establishment in which 
five or more inter-State migrant workmen are employed or were 
employed on any day of the preceding twelve months. It will also 
apply to every contractor who employs or employed five or more 

 
 
 
 
 
The Inter-State Migrant Workmen Act, 1979 
 
 
inter-State migrant workmen on any day of the preceding twelve 
months. 
(ii) The establishment proposing to employ inter-State migrant workmen 
will be required to be registered with registering officers appointed 
under the Central Government or the State Governments, as the 
case may be, depending on whether the establishment falls under 
the Central sphere or State sphere. Likewise, every contractor who 
proposes to recruit or employ inter-State migrant workmen will be 
required to obtain a licence from the specified authority both of the 
State to which the workman belongs (home State) and the State in 
which he is proposed to be employed (host State). 
(iii) The contractor will be required to furnish particulars regarding the 
wokmen in the form to be prescribed by rules to the specified 
authority of both the home State and the host State. The contractor 
will also be required to issue to every workman employed by him, a 
pass book containing the details of the employment. 
(iv) Specific guidelines have been indicated regarding the wages payable 
to inter-State migrant workman and he is required to be paid wages 
from the date of his recruitment. 
(v) The inter-State migrant workman will be entitled to a displacement 
allowance and a journey allowance in addition to his wages. 
(vi) The amenities that are required to be provided to the workmen 
would include provision of suitable residential accommodation, 
adequate medical facilities, protective clothing to suit varying climatic 
conditions and suitable conditions of work taking into account that 
they have migrated from another State. 
(vii) Inspectors will be appointed by the appropriate Government to see 
that the provisions of the legislation are being complied with. In 
addition, power has been given to the State Government of the 
home State to appoint, after consultation with the Government of 
the host State, inspectors for visiting the establishments wherein 
workmen from the former State are employed to see whether the 
provisions of the legislation are being complied with in the case of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
such workmen. 
(viii)The inter-State migrant workman may raise an industrial dispute 
arising out of his employment either in the host State or in the home 
State after his return to that State after the completion of the contract 
of employment. He will also be permitted to apply for the transfer 
of proceedings in relation to an industrial dispute pending before an 
authority in the host State to the corresponding authority in the home 
State on the ground that he has returned to the State after the 
completion of his contract. 
(ix) Deterrent punishments have been proposed for the contravention 
of the provisions of the legislation. 
 
 
ACT 30 OF 1979 
 
The Inter-State Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions 
of Service) Bill, 1979 was passed by both the Houses of Parliament. It got the 
assent of the President on llth June, 1979 and came on the Statute Book as THE 
INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT 
AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE)ACT, 1979 (30 of 1979). 

 
 
 
 
 
The Inter-State Migrant Workmen Act, 1979 
 
THE INTER-STATE MIGRANT WORKMEN 
(REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT AND 
CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) ACT, 1979 
 
 
(30 of 1979) 
 
 
[11th June, 1979] 
An Act to regulate the employment of inter-State migrant workmen and to 
provide for their conditions of service and for matters connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1 . 
Short title, extent, commencement and application.—(1) This Act may 
be called the Inter-State Migrant Workmen (Regulation of Employment and Conditions 
of Service) Act, 1979. 
(2) 
It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) 
It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint: 
Provided that if the Central Government considers it necessary or expedient 
so to do in the public interest, it may postpone or relax, to such extent as may 
be specified in such notification, the operation of all or any of the provisions 
of this Act in any State or States for such period not extending beyond one 
year from the date on which this Act comes into force. 
(4) 
It applies— 
(a) 
to every establishment in which five or more inter-State migrant 
workmen (whether or not in addition to other workmen) are employed 
or who were employed on any day of the preceding twelve months; 
(b) 
to every contractor who employs or who employed five or more inter- 
State migrant workmen (whether or not in addition to other workmen) 
on any day of the preceding twelve months. 
2 . 
Definitions.—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) 
“appropriate Government” means,— 
(i) in relation to— 
(1) 
any establishment pertaining to any industry carried on by or under the 
authority of the Central Government or pertaining to any such controlled industry as 
may be specified in this behalf by the Central Government; or 
 
1. Came into force on 2nd October, 1980, vide G.S.R. 513(E), dated llth August, 1980, published 
in the Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. II, Sec. 3(i), p. 891. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) 
any establishment of any railway, Cantonment Board, major port, mine 
or oil-field; or 
(3) 
any establishment of a banking or insurance company the Central 
Government; 
(ii) in relation to any other establishment, the Government of the State 
in which that other establishment is situated; 
(b) 
“contractor”, in relation to an establishment, means a person who 
undertakes (whether as an independent contractor, agent, employee or 
otherwise) to produce a given result for the establishment, other than a 
mere supply of goods or articles of manufacture to such establishment, 
by the employment of workmen or to supply workmen to the 
establishment, and includes a sub-contractor, Khatadar, Sardar, agent 
or any other person, by whatever name called, who recruits or employs 
workmen; 
(i) the 
(c) 
“controlled industry” means any industry the control of which by the 
Un ion has been declared by any Central Act to be expedient in the 
public interest; 
(d) 
“establishment” means— 
(i) any office or department of the Government or a local authority; or 
(ii) any place where any industry, trade, business, manufacture or 
occupation is carried on; 
(e) 
“inter-State migrant workman” means any person who is recruited by 
or through a contractor in one State under an agreement or other 
arrangement for employment in an establishment in another State, 
whether with or without the knowledge of the principal employer in 
relation to such establishment; 
(f) 
“prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(g) 
“principal employer” means,— 
(i) in relation to any office or department of the Government or a local 
authority, the head of that office, department or authority or such 
other officer as the Government or the local authority, as the case 
may be, may specify in this behalf; 
(ii) in relation to a factory, the owner or occupier of the factory and 
where a person has been named as the manager of the factory 
under the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948), the person so named; 
(iii) in relation to a m ine, the owner or agent of the mine and where a 
person has been named as the manager of the mine, the person so 
named; 

 
 
 
 
 
The Inter-State Migrant Workmen Act, 1979 
 
(iv) in relation to any other establishment, any person responsible for 
the supervision and control of the establishment. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of sub-clause (iii) of this clause, the expres-sions 
“mine”, “owner” and “agent” shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them 
in clause (j), clause (e) and clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Mines 
Act,1952 (35 of 1952); 
(h) 
“recruitment” includes entering into any agreement or other arrangement 
for recruitment and all its grammatical variations and cognate expressions 
shall be construed accordingly; 
(i) 
“wages” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (vi) of section 2 
of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (4 of 1936); 
(j) 
“workman” means any person employed in or in connection with the 
work of any establishment to do any skilled, semi-skilled or unskilled, 
manual, supervisory, technical or clerical work for hire or reward, 
whether the terms of employment be express or implied, but does not 
include any such person— 
(i) who is employed mainly in a managerial or administration capacity; 
or 
(ii) who, being employed in a supervisory capacity, draws wages 
exceeding five hundred rupees per mensem, or exercises, either by 
the nature of the duties attached to the office or by reason of the 
powers vested in him, functions mainly of a managerial nature. 
(2) 
Any reference in this Act to any law which is not in force in any area 
shall, in relation to that area, be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, 
if any, in force in that area. 
 
 
COMMENTS 
(i) 
The expressions “mine”, “owner” and “agent” have the same meanings as 
respectively assigned to them in clause (j), clause (1) and clause (c) of sub-section 
(1) of section 2 of the Mines Act, 1952. Clause (j), (I) and (c) of the Mines Act, 1952 are 
as under: 
(j) 
“Mine” means any excavation where any operation for the purpose of 
searching for or obtaining minerals has been or is being carried on and 
includes.— 
(i) all borings, bore holes, oil wells and accessory crude conditioning 
plants, including the pipe conveying mineral oil within the oil fields; 
(ii) all shafts, in or adjacent to and belonging to a mine, whether in the 
course of being sunk or not; 
(iii) all levels and inclined planes in the course of being driven; (iv) all 
open cast workings; 

 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) all conveyors or aerial ropeways provided for the bringing into or removal 
from a mine of minerals or other articles or for the removal of refuse 
therefrom; 
(vi) 
all adits, levels, planes, machinery, works, railways, tramways and sidings 
in or adjusted to and belongings to a mine; 
(vii) all protective works being carried out in or adjacent to a mine; 
(viii) all workshops and stores situated within the precincts of a mine and 
under the same management and used primarily for the purposes 
connected with that mine or a number of mines under the same 
management; 
(ix) 
all power stations, transformer sub-stations, converter stations, rectifier 
stations and accumulator, storage stations for supplying electricity solely 
or mainly for the purpose of working the mine or a number of mines 
under the same management; 
(x) 
any premises for the time being used for depositing sand or other material 
for use in a mine or for depositing refuse from a mine or in which any 
operations in connection with such sand, refuse or other material is 
being carried on, being premises exclusively occupied by “the owner of 
the mine; 
(xi) 
any premises in or adjacent to and belonging to a mine on which any 
process ancillary to the getting, dressing or preparations for sale of 
minerals or of coke is being carried on; 
(1) 
“Owner”, when used in relation to a mine, means any person who is the 
immediate proprietor or lessee or occupier of the mine or of any part 
thereof and in the case of a mine the business whereof is being carried 
on by a liquidator or receiver, such liquidator or receiver but does not 
include a person who merely receives a royalty, rent or fine from the 
mine, or is merely the proprietor of the mine, subject it to any lease, 
grantor licence for the working thereof, or is merely the owner of the 
soil and not interested in the minerals of the mine; but any contractor or 
sub-lessee for the working of a mine or any part thereof shall be subject 
to this Act in like manner as if he were an owner, but not so as to 
exempt the owner from any liability; 
(c) 
“agent”, when used in relation to a mine, means every person, whether 
appointed as such or not, who, acting or purporting to act on behalf of 
the owner, take part in the management, control, supervision or direction 
of the mine or of any part thereof; 
(ii) “Wages” have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (vi) of 
section 2 of the Pay merit of Wages Act, 1936. Clause (vi) of section 
2 of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 is as under: 

 
 
 
 
 
The Inter-State Migrant Workmen Act, 1979 
 
(vi) “wages” means all remuneration (whether by way of salary, 
allowances, or otherwise) expressed in terms of money or capable 
of being so expressed which would, if the terms of employment, 
express or implied, were fulfilled, be payable to a person employed 
in respect of his employment or of work done in such employment, 
and includes— 
(a) 
any remuneration payable under any award or settlement between the 
parties or order of a court; 
(b) 
any remuneration to which the person employed is entitled in respect of 
over- time work or holidays or any leave period; 
(c) 
any additional remuneration payable under the terms of employment 
(whether called a bonus or by any other name); 
(d) 
any sum which by reason of the termination of employment of the person 
employed is payable under any law, contract or instrument which provides 
for the payment of such sum, whether with or without deductions, but 
does not provide for the time within which the payment is to be made; 
(e) 
any sum to which the person employed is entitled under any scheme 
framed under any law for the time being in force, but does not include— 
(1) any bonus (whether under a scheme of profit sharing or otherwise) 
which does not form part of the remuneration payable under the 
terms of employment or which is not payable under any award or 
settlement between the parties or order of a Court; 
(2) the value of any house-accommodation, or of the supply of light, 
water, medical attendance or other amenity or of any service 
excluded from the computation of wages by general or special order 
of the State Government; 
(3) any contribution paid by the employer to any pension or provident 
fund, and the interest which may have accrued thereon; 
(4) any travelling allowance or the value of any travelling concession: 
(5) any sum paid to the employed person to defray special expenses 
entailed on him by the nature of his employment; or 
(6) any gratuity payable on the termination of employment in cases 
other than those specified in sub-clause (d). 
 
 
CHAPTERII 
REGISTRATION OFESTABLISHMENTEMPLOYING 
INTER-STATE MIGRANTWORKMEN 
3 . 
Appointment of registering officers.—The appropriate Government may, 
by order notified in the Official Gazette,— 
(a) 
appoint such persons, being officers of Government, as it thinks fit to be 
registering officers for the purposes of this Chapter; and 
(b) 
define the limits, within which a registering officer shall exercise the 
powers conferred on him by or under this Act. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMENTS 
The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint 
registeringofficers and define their respective limits of jurisdiction and powers under 
the Act. 
 
4 . 
Registration of certain establishments.—(1) Every principal employer of 
an establishment to which this Act applies shall, within such period as the appropriate 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix in this behalf with respect 
to establishments generally or with respect to any class of them, make an application 
to the registering officer, in such form and manner and on payment of such fees as 
may be prescribed, for the registration of the establishment: 
Provided that the registering officer may entertain any such application for 
registration after the expiry of the period fixed in that behalf, if the registering 
officer is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from 
making the application in time. 
(2) 
Within one month after the receipt of an application for registration 
under sub-section (I), the registering officer shall,— 
(a) 
if the application is complete in all respects, registerthe establishment 
and issue to the principal employer of the establishment a certificate of 
registration in the prescribed form; and 
(b) 
if the application is not so complete, return the application to the principal 
employer ofthe establishment. 
(3) 
Where within a period of one month after the receipt of an application 
for registration of an establishment under sub-section (1), the registering officer 
does not grant under clause (a) of sub-section (2) the certificate of registration 
applied for and does not return the application under clause (b) of that sub-section, 
the registering officer shall, within fifteen days ofthe receipt of an application in this 
behalf, from the principal employer, registerthe establ ishment and issue to the principal 
employer a certificate of registration in the prescribed form. 
 
 
COMMENTS 
An application for registration of an establishment must be moved by the principal 
employer thereof within sucli period as the appropriate Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, fix in that behalf, and in such form and manner and on payment of 
such fees as may be prescribed. 
 
5 . 
Revocation of registration in certain cases.—If the registering officer is 
satisfied, either on a reference made to him in this behalf or otherwise, that the 
registration of any establishment has been obtained by misrepresentation or 
suppression of any material fact or that for any other reason, the registration has 
become useless or ineffective and, therefore, requires to be revoked, the registering 
officer may, after giving an opportunity to the principal employer ofthe establishment 

 
 
 
 
 
The Inter-State Migrant Workmen Act, 1979 
 
to be heard and with the previous approval ofthe appropriate Government, revoke 
by order in writing the registratioon and communicate the order to the principal 
employer: 
Provided that where the registering officer considers it necessary so to do for 
any special reasons, he may, pending such revocation, by order suspend the 
operation ofthe certificate of registration for such period as may be specified 
in the order and serve, by registered post, such order along with a statement 
ofthe reasons on the principal employer and such order shall take effect on 
the date on which such service is effected. 
 
 
COMMENTS 
The registering officer may revoke the registration of any defaulting establishment 
after giving an opportunity to the principal employer thereof to be heard and with the 
prior approval ofthe appropriate Government. 
 
6 . 
Prohibition against employment of inter-State migrant workmen without 
registration.—No principal employer of an establishment to which this Act applied 
shall employ inter-State migrant workmen in the establishment unless a certificate 
of registration in respect of such establishment issued under this Act is in force: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to any establishment in respect of 
which an application for registration made within the period fixed, whether originally 
or on extension under sub-section (1) of section 4 is pending before a registering 
officer and for the purposes of this proviso, an application to which the provisions of 
sub-section (3) of section 4 apply shall be deemed to be pending before the registering 
officer concerned till the certificate of registration is issued in accordance with the 
provisions of that sub-section. 
 
 
COMMENTS 
Employment of inter-State migrant workmen in any establishment is prohibited 
unless it is duly registered under this Act. 
 
 
CHAPTERIII LICENSING OF 
CONTRACTORS 
7 . 
Appointment of licenceship officers.—The appropriate Government, by 
order notified in the Official Gazette,— 
(a) 
appoint such persons, being officers of Government, as it thinks fit to be 
licensing officers for the purposes of this Chapter; and 
(b) 
define the limits, within which a licensing officer shall exercise the 
jurisdiction and powers conferred on licensing officers by or under 
this Act, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMMENTS 
The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette appoint 
licensing officers and define their respective limits of jurisdiction and powers under this Act. 
 
8 . 
Licensing of contractors.—(1) With effect from such date1 as the 
appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, no 
contractor to whom this Act applies shall,— 
(a) 
recruit’ any person in a State for the purpose of employing him in any 
establishment situated in another State, except under and in accordance 
with a licence issued in that behalf,— 
(i) if such establishment is an establishment referred to in sub-clause 
(i) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 2, by the licensing 
officer appointed by the Central Government who has jurisdiction 
in relation to the area wherein the recruitment is made; 
(ii) if such establishment is an establishment referred to in sub-clause 
(ii) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 2, by the licensing 
officer appointed by the State Government who has jurisdiction in 
relation to the area wherein the recruitment is made; 
(b) employ as workmen for the execution of any work in any 
establishment in any State, persons from another State (whether or 
not in addition to other workmen) except under and in accordance 
with a licence issued in that behalf— 
(i) if such establishment is an establishment referred to in sub-clause 
(i) of clause (a) of sub-section (I) of section 2, by the licensing 
officer appointed by the Central Government who has jurisdiction 
in relation to the area wherein the establishment is sitauted; 
(ii) if such establishment is an establishment referred to in sub-clause 
(ii) of clause (a) of sub-section (I) of section 2, by the licensing 
officer appointed by the State Government who has jurisdiction in 
relation to the area wherein the establish-ment is situated. 
(2) 
Subject to the provisions of this Act, a licence under sub-section (1) 
may contain such conditions including, in particular, the terms and conditions of the 
agreement or other arrangement under which the workmen will be recruited, the 
remuneration payable, hours of work, fixation of wages and other essential amenities 
in respect of the inter-State migrant workmen, as the appropriate Government may 
deem fit to impose in accordance with the rules, if any, made under section 35 and 
shall be issued on payment of such fees as may be prescribed: 
 
 
1. 1-6-1987, vide S.O. 630(E), dated 25th June, 1987. 

 
 
 
 
 
The Inter-State Migrant Workmen Act, 1979 
 
Provided that if for any special reasons, the licensing officer is satisfied that it 
is necessary to require any person who has applied for, or who has been 
issued, a licence to furnish any, security for the due performance of the 
conditions of the licence, he may, after communicating such reasons to such 
person and giving him an opportunity to represent his case, determine in 
accordance with the rules made in this behalf the security which shall be 
furnished by such person for obtaining or, as the case may be, for continuing 
to hold the licence. 
(3) 
The security wh ich may be required to be furnished under the proviso 
to sub-section (2) shall be reasonable and the rules for the purposes of the said 
proviso shall, on the basis of the number of workmen employed, the wages payable 
to them, the facilities which shall be afforded to them and other relevant factors 
provide for the norms with reference to which such security may be determined. 
9 . 
Grant of licences.—(1) Every application for the grant of a licence under 
sub-section (1) of section 8 shall be made in the prescribed form and shall contain 
the particulars regarding the location of the establishment, the nature ofprocess, 
operation or work for which inter-State migrant workmen are to be employed and 
such other particulars as may be prescribed. 
(2) 
The licensing officer may make such investigation in respect of the 
application received under sub-section (1) and in making any such investigation, the 
licensing officer shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed. 
(3) 
A licence granted under section 8, shall be valid for the period specified 
therein and may be renewed from time to time for such period and on payment of 
such fees and on such conditions as may be prescribed. 
 
 
COMMENTS 
The licensing officer may investigate in respect of an application by following such 
procedure as may be prescribed. 
 
10. Revocation, suspension and amendment of licences.—(1) If the licensing 
officer is satisfied, either on a reference made to him in this behalf or otherwise^ 
that— 
(a) 
a licence granted under section 8 has been obtained by misrepresentation 
or suppression of any material fact, or 
(b) 
the holder of a licence has, without reasonable cause, failed to comply 
with the conditions subject to which the licence has been granted or has 
contravened any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, 
then, without prejudice to any other penalty to which the holder of the 
licence may be liable under this Act, the licensing officer may, after 
giving the holder of the licence an opportunity to be heard, by order in 
writing, revoke the licence or forfeit the security furnished by him under 

 
 
 
 
 
 
the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 8 or any part thereof and 
communicate the order to the holder of the licence: 
Provided that where the licensing officer considers it necessary so to do for 
any special reasons, he may, pending such revocation or forfeiture, by order, 
suspend the operation of the licence for such period as may be specified in the 
order and serve, by registered post, such order along with a statement of the 
reasons on the holder of the licence and such order shall take effect on the 
date on which such service is effected. 
(2) 
Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the licensing officer 
may vary or amend a licence granted under section 8. 
 
 
COMMENTS 
The licensing officer may revoke, suspend and amend the licence after giving the 
licensed holder an opportunity to be heard. 
 
11. Appeal.—(1) Any person aggrieved by an order made under section 4, section 
5, section 8 or section 10 may, within thirty days from the date on which the order is 
communicated to him, prefer an appeal to an appellate officer who shall be a person 
nominated in this behalf by the appropriate Government: 
Provided that the appellate officer may entertain the appeal after the expiry of 
the said period of thirty days, if he is satisfied that the appellate was prevented 
by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time. 
(2) 
On receipt of an appeal under sub-section (1), the appellate officer 
shall, after giving the appellate an opportunity of being heard, dispose of the appeal 
as expeditiously as possible. 
 
 
COMMENTS 
Any person aggrieved by an order made under sections 4,5,8, and 10 may within 
thirty days from the knowledge of such order, prefer an appeal to an appellate officer 
nominated by the appropriate Government in this behalf. Sufficient cause have to be given 
for condonation of dealy in filing the appeal in statutory time under this Act. 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
DUTIESAND OBLIGATIONS OF CONTRACTORS 
12. Duties of contractors.—(1) It shall be the duty of every contractor— (a) to 
furnisji such particulars and in such form as may be prescribed, tojhe specified 
authority in the State from which an inter-State migrant workman is recruited and in 
the State in which such workman is employed, within fifteen days from the date of 
recruitment, or, as the case may be, the date of employment, and where any change 
occurs in any of the particulars so furnished,, such change shall be notified to the 
specified authorities of both the States; 

 
 
 
 
 
The Inter-State Migrant Workmen Act, 1979 
 
(b) 
to issue to every inter-State migrant workmen, a pass book affixed with 
a passport size photograph of the workman and indicating in Hindi and 
English languages, and where the language of the workman is not Hindi 
or English, also in the language of the workman,— 
(i) the name and place of the establishment wherein the workman is 
employed; 
(ii) the period of employment; 
(iii) the proposed rates and modes of payment of wages; 
(iv) the displacement allowance payable; 
(v) the return fare payable to the workman on the expiry of the period 
of his employment and in such contingencies as may be prescribed 
and in such other contingencies as may be specified in the contract 
of employment; 
(vi) deductions made; and 
(vii) such other particulars as may be prescribed; 
(c) 
to furnish in respect of every inter-State migrant workman who ceases 
to be employed, a return in such form and in such manner as may be 
prescribed, to the specified authority in the State from which he is 
recruited and in the State in which he is employed, which shall include a 
declaration that all the wages and other dues payable to the workman 
and the fare for the return journey back to his State have been paid. 
(2) 
The contractor shall maintain the pass book referred to in sub-section 
(1) up-to-date and cause it to be retained with the inter-State migrant workman 
concerned. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section and section 16 “specified authority” 
means such authority as may be specified by the appropriate Government in 
this behalf. 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
WAGES WELFAREAND OTHER FACILITIES TO BE PROVIDED 
TO INTER-STATE MIGRANTWORKMEN 
13. Wage rates and other conditions of service of inter-State migrant 
workmen.—(1) The wage rates, holidays, hours of work and other conditions of 
service of an inter-State migrant workman shall,— 
(a) 
in a case where such workman performs in any establishment, the same 
or similar kind of work as is being performed by any other workman in 
that establishment, be the same as those applicable to such other 
workman; and 
(b) 
in any other case, be such as may be prescribed by the appropriate 
Government: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Provided that an inter-State m igrant workman shall in no case be paid less 
than the wages fixed under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (41 of 1948). 
(2) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being 
in force, wages payable to an inter-State migrant workmen under this section shall 
be paid in cash. 
 
 
COMMENTS 
(i) 
Section 13 deals with the wage rates, holidays, hours of work and other 
conditions of service of inter-state migrant workmen. 
(ii) 
An inter-State migrant workman shall in no case be paid less than the wages 
fixed under the Minimun Wages Act, 1948. 
(iii) 
Wages payable to an inter-State migrant workman/under this section shall 
be paid in ‘cash’ and not in any other manner/form. 
 
14. Displacement allowance.—(1) There shall be paid by the contractor to every 
inter-State migrant workman at the time of recruitment, adisplacement allowance 
equal to fifty per cent, of the monthly wages payable to him or seventy-five rupees, 
whichever is higher 
(2) 
The amount paid to a workman as displacement allowance under sub- 
section (1) shall not be refundable and shall be in addition to the wages or other 
amount payable to him. 
 
 
COMMENTS 
Every inter-State migrant workman is entitled to a displacement allowance at the 
time of recruitment, which may be either seventy-five rupees or half of the monthly wages 
payable to him, whichever is higher. 
 
15. Journey allowance etc.—A journey allowance of a sum not less than the fare 
from the place of residence of the inter-State migrant workman in his State to the 
place of work in the other State shall be payable by the contractor to the workman 
both for the outward and return journeys and such workman shall be entitled to 
payment of wages during the period of such journeys as if he were on duty. 
 
 
COMMENTS 
Every inter-State migrant workman is entitled to payment of wages during the period 
of journeys on duty and is also entitled to’ journey allowance’ for outward and return 
journeys from the place of residence in his State to the place of work in the other State. 
 
16. Other facilities.—It shall be the duty of every contractor employing inter- 
State migrant workmen in connection with the work of an establishment to which 
this Act applies,— 
(a) 
to ensure regular payment of wages to such workmen;. 

 
 
 
 
 
The Inter-State Migrant Workmen Act, 1979 
 
(b) 
to ensure equal pay for equal work irrespective of sex; 
(c) 
to ensure suitable conditions of work to such workmen having regard to 
the fact that they are required to work in a State different from their 
own State; 
(d) 
to provide and maintain suitable residential accommodation to such 
workmen during the period of their employment; 
(e) 
to provide the prescribed medical facilities to the workmen, free of 
charge; 
(f) 
to provide such protective clothing to the workmen as may be prescribed; 
and 
(g) 
in case of fatal accident or serious bodily injury to any such workman, 
to report to the specified authorities of both the States and also the next 
of kin of the workman. 
17. Responsibility for payment of wages.—(1) A contractor shall be responsible 
for payment of wages to each inter-State migrant workman employed by him and 
such wages shall be paid before the expiry of such period as may be prescribed. 
(2) 
Every principal employer shall nominate a representative duly authorised 
by him to be present at the time of disbursement of wages by the contractor and it 
shall be the duty of such representative to certify the amounts paid as wages in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) 
It shall be the duty of the contractor to ensure the disbursement of 
wages in the presence of the authorised representative of the principal employer. 
(4) 
In case the contractor fails to make payment of wages within the 
prescribed period or makes short payment, then the principal employer shall be 
liable to make payment of the wages in fu II or the unpaid balance due, as the case 
may be, to the inter-State migrant workman employed by the contractor and recover 
the amount so paid from the contractor either by deduction from any amount payable 
to the contractor under any contract or as a debt payable by the contractor. 
18. Liability of principal employer in certain cases. —(1) If any allowance 
required to be paid under section 14 or section 15 to an inter-State migrant workman 
employed in an establishment to which this Act applies is not paid by the contractor 
or if any facility specified in section 16 is not provided for the benefit of such workman, 
such allowance shall be paid, or, as the case may be, the facility shall be provided, by 
the principal employer within such time as may be prescribed. 
(2) 
Al 1 the allowances paid by the principal employer or all the expenses 
incurred by him in providing the facility referred to in sub-section (1) may be recovered 
by him from the contractor either by deduction from any amount payable to the 
contractor under any contract or as a debt payable by the contractor. 
19. Past liabilities.—It shall be the duty of every contractor and every principal 
employer to ensure that any loan given by such contractor or principal employer to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
any inter-State migrant workman does not remain outstanding after the completion 
of the period of employment of such workman under the said contractor or, as the 
case may be, in the establishment of such principal employer and accordingly every 
obligation of an inter-State migrant workman to re-pay any debt obtained by him 
during the period of his employment from the contractor or the principal employer 
and remaining unsatisfied before the comple-tion of such period shall, on such 
completion, be deemed to have been extinguished and no suit or other proceeding 
shall lie in any court or before any authority for the recovery of such debt or any part 
thereof. 
 
 
CHAPTER VI 
INSPECTINGSTAFF 
20. Inspectors.—(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint such persons as it thinks fit to be inspectors for the purposes 
of this Act, and define the local limits within which they shall exercise their powers 
under this Act. 
(2) 
Subject to any rules made in this behalf, within the local limits for which 
he is appointed, an inspector may— 
(a) 
if he has reason to believe that any inter-State migrant workmen are 
employed in any premises or place, enter, at all reasonable hours, with 
such assistants (if any), being persons in the service of the Government 
or any local or other public authority as he thinks fit, such premises or 
place for the purpose of— 
(i) 
satisfying himself whether the provisions of this Act in relation to the 
payment of wages, conditions of service, or facilities to be provided to 
such workmen are being complied with; 
(ii) 
examining any register or record or notices required to be kept or 
exhibited by the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, and 
requiring the production thereof for inspection; 
(b) 
examine any person found in any such premises or place for the purpose 
of determining whether such person is an inter-State migrant workman; 
(c) 
require any person giving out work to any workman, to give any 
information, which is in his power to give, with respect to the names 
and addresses of the persons to, for and from whom the work is given 
out or received, and with respect to the payments to be made for the 
work; 
(d) 
seize or take copies of such register, record of wages, ornotices or 
portions thereof as he may consider relevant in respect of an offence 
under this Act which he has reason to believe has ben committed by a 
principal employer or contractor, and 

 
 
 
 
 
The Inter-State Migrant Workmen Act, 1979 
 
(e) 
exercise such other powers as may be prescribed. 
(3) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), if a 
State Govern-ment considers it necessary for the purpose of satisfying itself that the 
provisions of this Act are being complied with in respect of any workmen belonging 
to that State and employed in an establishment situated in another State, it may, by 
order in writing, appoint such persons, being persons in the service of that Government, 
for the exercise of such of the powers mentioned in sub-section (2), as may be 
specified in that order: 
Provided that no such order shall be issued without the concurrence of the 
Government of the State in which such workmen are employed or where the 
establishment is an establishment referred to in sub-clause (i) of clause (a) of 
sub-section (1) of section 2, without the concurrence of the Central Government. 
(4) 
Any person required to produce any document or thing, or to give any 
information required, by an inspector under sub-section (2), or by a person appointed 
under sub-section (3), shall be deemed to be legally bound to do so within the meaning 
of section 175 and section 176 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
(5) 
The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), 
shall, so far as may be, apply to any search or seizure under this section as they 
apply to any search or seizure made under the authority of a warrant issued under 
section 94 of the said Code. 
 
 
CHAPTERVII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
21. Inter-State migrant workmen to be deemed to be in employment from 
date of recruitment for the purposes of certain enactments.—For the purposes 
of the enactments specified in the Schedule, an inter-State migrant workman shall, 
on and from the date of his recruitment, be deemed to be employed and actually 
worked in the establishment or, as the case may be, the first establishment in connection 
with the work of which he is employed. 
22. Provisions regarding industrial disputes in relation to inter-State 
migrant workmen.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), any dispute or difference in connection with the 
employment or non-employment orthe terms of employment orthe conditions of 
labour, of an inter-State migrant workman (hereafter in this section referred to as 
the industrial dispute), may,— 
(a) 
if the industrial dispute is relatable to an establishment referred to in 
sub-clause (i) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 2, be referred 
under the provisions of the said Act, by the Central Government to any 
of the authorities referred to in Chapter II of that Act (hereafter in this 
section referred to as the said authorities),— 

 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) in the State wherein the establishment is situated; 
(ii) in the State wherein the recruitment of such workman was made if 
he makes an appl ication in that behalf to that Government on the 
ground that he has returned to that State after the completion of his 
employment; 
(b) 
if the industrial dispute is relatable to an establishment referred to in 
sub-clause (ii) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 2,— 
(i) be referred under the provisions of the said Act, by the Government 
of the State wherein the establishment is situated, to any of the said 
authorities in that State; or 
(ii) be referred under the provisions of the said Act, by the Government 
of the State wherein the recruitment of such workman was made 
to any of the said authorities in that State, if he makes an application 
in that behalf to that Government on the ground that he has returned 
to that State after the comple-tion of his employment: 
Provided that— 
(a) 
no application referred to in sub-clause (ii) of clause (a) or sub-clause 
(ii) of clause (b) shall be entertained after the expiry of a period of six 
months from the date of his return to the State wherein the recruitment 
was made after the completion of his employment, unless the Government 
concerned is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by sufficient 
cause from making the application within that period; 
(b) 
no reference under the said sub-clause (ii) of clause (b) shall be made 
except after obtaining the concurrence of the Government of the State 
wherein the establishment concerned is situated. 
(2) 
Without prejudice to the provisions of section 33B of the Industrial 
Disputes Act,1947 (14 of 1947), where during the pendency of any proceeding in 
respect of an industrial dispute under that Act before any of the said authorities in 
the State wherein the establishment is situated, an application is made to that authority 
by an inter-State migrant workman for the transfer of such proceeding to 
acorresponding authority in the State wherein his recruitment was made on the 
ground that he has returned to that State after the completion of his employment, 
that authority shall forward the application to the Central Government, or, as the 
case may be, to the Government of the State wherein such recruitment was made 
and transfer such proceeding in the prescribed manner to such authority as may be 
specified in this behalf by that Government: 
Provided that in a case where no authority has been specified by the Government 
concerned within the prescribed period, the authority before which the 
proceeding is pending shall, on a request being made by the inter-State migrant 
workman and after obtaining the previous approval of the Government which 

 
 
 
 
 
The Inter-State Migrant Workmen Act, 1979 
 
refer red the dispute to that authority, for ward such proceeding to the 
Government concerned for reference of such dispute to an authority in the 
State wherein such recruitment was made. 
(3) 
Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (2), if the Central 
Government is satisfied that it is expedient in the interests of justice so to do, it may, 
by order in writing and for reasons to be stated therein, withdraw any proceeding in 
respect of any industrial dispute relating to an inter-State migrant workman pending 
before an authority in the State in which the establishment concerned is situated and 
transfer the same to such authority in the State wherein the recruitment of such 
workman was made as may be specified in the order. 
(4) 
The authority to which any proceeding is transferred under this section 
may proceed either de novo or from the stage at which it was so transferred. 
23. Registers and other records to be maintained.—(1) Every principal 
employer and every contractor shall maintain such registers and records giving such 
particulars of the inter-State migrant workmen employed, the nature of work 
performed by such workmen, the rates of wages paid to the workmen and such 
other particulars in such form as may be prescribed. 
(2) 
Every principal employer and every contractor shall keep exhibited in 
such manner as may be prescribed within the premises of the establishment where 
the inter-State migrant workmen are employed, notices in the prescribed form 
containingparticulars about the hours of work, nature of duty and such other 
information as may be prescribed. 
24. Obstructions.—(1) Whoever obstructs an inspector or a person appointed 
under sub-section (3) of section 20 (hereinafter referred to as the authorised person) 
in the discharge of his duties under this Act or refuses or wilfully neglects to afford 
the inspector or authorised person any reasonable facility for making any inspection, 
examination, inquiry or investiga-tion authorised by or under this Act in relation to an 
establishment to which, or a contractor to whom, this Act applies, shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which 
may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both. 
(2) 
Whoever wilfully refuses to produce on the demand of any inspector or 
authorised person any register or other document kept in pursuance of this Act or 
prevents or attempts to prevent or does anything which he has reason to believe is 
likely to prevent any person from appearing before or being examined by any inspector 
or authorised person acting in pursuance of his duties under this Act, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with 
fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both. 
25. Contravention of provisions regarding employment of inter-State 
migrant workmen.—Whoever contravenes any provisions of this Act or of any 
rules made thereun-der regulating the employment of inter-State migrant workmen, 
or contravenes any condition of a licence granted under this Act, shall be punishable 

 
 
 
 
 
 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both, and in the case of a continuing 
contravention, with an additional fine which may extend to one hundred rupees for 
every day during which such contravention continues after conviction for the first 
such contravention. 
26. Other offences.—If any person contravenes any of the provisions of this 
Act or of any rules made thereunder for which no other penalty is elsewhere provided, 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, 
or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both. 
27. Offences by companies.—(1) Where an offence underthis Act has been 
committed by a company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, 
was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business 
of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence 
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person 
liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his 
knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of 
such offence. 
(2) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any 
offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the 
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to 
any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the 
company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be 
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,— 
(a) 
“company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other 
association of individuals; and 
(b) 
“director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
28. Cognizance of offences.—No court shall take cognizance of any offence 
under this Act except on a complaint made by, or with the previous sanction in 
writing of, an inspector or authorised person and no court inferior to that of a 
Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence 
punishable under this Act. 
29. Limitation of prosecutions.—No court shall take cognizance of an offence 
punishable under this Act unless the complaint thereof is made within three months 
from the date on which the alleged commission of the offence came to the knowledge 
of the inspector or authorised person concerned: 
Provided that where the offence consists of disobeying a written order made 
by an inspector or authorised person, complaint thereof may be made within 
six months of the date on which the offence is alleged to have been committed. 

 
 
 
 
 
The Inter-State Migrant Workmen Act, 1979 
 
30. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with the Act.—(1) The 
provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith 
contained in any other law or in the terms of any agreement or contract of service, 
or in any standing orders applicable to the establishment whether made before or 
after the commencement of this Act: 
Provided that where under any such law, agreement, contract of service or 
standing orders, the inter-State migrant workmen employed in the establishment 
are entitled to benefits in respect of any matter which are more favourable to 
them than those to which they would be entitled underthis Act, the inter-State 
migrant workmen shall continue to be entitled to the more favourable benefits 
in respect of that matter, notwithstanding that they receive benefits in respect 
of other matters under this Act. 
(2) 
Noth ing contained in this Act shall be construed as precluding any 
inter-State migrant workmen from entering into an agreement with the principal 
employer or the contractor, as the case may be, for granting them rights or pri vi 
leges in respect of any matter which are more favourable to them than those to 
which they would be entitled under this Act. 
31. Power to exempt in special cases.—The appropriate Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette and subjectto such conditions and restrictions, if 
any, and for such period or periods as may be specified in the notification, direct that 
all or any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder shall not apply to 
or in relation to any establ ishment or class of establishments or any contractor or 
class of contractors or any inter-State m igrant workmen in such establishments or 
class of such workmen, if that Government is satisfied that it is just and proper so to 
do having regard to the methods of recruitment and the conditions of employment in 
such establishment or class of establishments and all other relevant circumstances. 
32. Protection of action taken under Act.—(1) No suit, prosecution or other 
legal proceedings shall lie against any registering officer, licensing officer or any 
other employee of the Government for anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder. 
(2) 
 No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Government for 
any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or notification or order made 
or issued thereunder. 
33. Power to give directions.—The Central Government may give directions 
to the Government of any State as to the carrying into execution in the State of the 
provisions contained in this Act. 
34. Power to remove difficulties.—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect 
to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the 
Official Gazette , make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this 
Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years from 
the date on which this Act comes into force. 
(2) 
Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is 
made, be laid before each House of Parliament. 
35. Power to make rules.—(1) The appropriate Government may, subject to 
the condition of previous publication, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this 
Act. 
(2) 
In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, 
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) 
the form and manner in which an application for the registration of an 
establishment may be made under section 4, the fees payable thereon 
and the form of a certificate of registration issued under that section; 
(b) 
the form in which an application for the grant or renewal of a licence 
may be made under section 9 and the particulars itmay contain; 
(c) 
the manner in which an investigation is to be made in respect of an 
application for the grant of a licence and the matters to be taken into 
account in granting or refusing a licence; 
(d) 
the form of a licence which may be granted or renewed under this Act, 
the conditions subject to which the licence may be granted or renewed, 
the fees payable for the grant or renewal of a licence and the security, 
if any, required to be furnished for the due performance of the conditions 
of the licence; 
(e) 
the circumstances under which licencs may be varied or amended under 
section 10; 
(f) 
the form and the manner in which appeals may be filed under section 11 
and the procedure to be followed by appellate officers in disposing of 
the appeals; 
(g) 
the wage rates, holidays, hours of work and other conditions of service 
which an inter-State migrant workman is entitled under section 13; 
(h) 
the period within which wages payable to inter-State migrant workmen 
should be paid by the contractor under sub-section (1) of section 17 and 
the manner of certification of such payment under sub-section (2) thereof; 
(i) 
the time within which allowances or facilities required by this Act to be 
provided and maintained may be so provided by the contractor and in 
case of default on the part of the contractor, by the principal employer 
under section 18; 
(j) 
the powers that may be exercised by inspectors under section 20; 
(k) 
the form of registers and records to be maintained, and the particulars 
and information to be contained in notices to be exhibited, by the principal 
employers and contractors under section 23; 

 
 
 
 
 
The Inter-State Migrant Workmen Act, 1979 
 
(l) 
the manner of submission of returns, and the forms in which, and the 
authorities to which, such returns may be submitted; 
(m) 
legal aid to inter-State migrant workmen; (n) any other matter which is 
required to be, or may be, prescribed under this Act. 
(3) 
Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is 
in session for atotal period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or 
in two or more successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
36. Repeals and saving.—(1) The Orissa Dadan Labour (Control and Regulation) 
Act, 1975 (Orissa Act 42 of 1975) and any law corresponding to this Act, in force in 
any State, shall stand repealed. 
(2) 
Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under 
the provisions of the Act or law so repealed shall, in so far as such thing or action is 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or 
taken under the provisions of this Act as if the said provisions were in force when 
such thing was done or such action was taken and shall continue to be in force 
accordingly until superseded by anything done or any action taken under this Act. 
 
 
THESCHEDULE 
(See section 21) 
 
 
1. 
The Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 ( 8 of 1923). 
2. 
The Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (4 of 1936). 
3. 
The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947). 
4. 
The Employees’ State Insurance Act,1948 (34 of 1948). 
5. 
The Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 
1952 ( 19 of 1952). 
6. 
The Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 (53 of 1961). 
 
 
 
* * *