THE WORKMEN'S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923 
 
 ACT NO. 8 OF 1923 1* 
 
 [5th March, 1923.] 
 
 
 An Act to provide for the payment by certain classes of employers to 
 their workmen of compensation for injury by accident. 
 
 WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for the payment by certain 
 classes of employers to their workmen of compensation for injury by 
 accident; It is hereby enacted as follows:-- 
 
 
 CHAP 
 
 PRELIMINARY 
 
 
 CHAPTER I 
 
 PRELIMINARY 
 
 
 1. 
 
 Short title, extent and commencement. 
 
 
 1. Short title, extent and commencement.- (1) This Act may be 
 called the Workmen's Compensation Act 1923. 
 
 2*[(2) It extends to the whole of India 3***.] 
 
 (3) It shall come into force on the first day of July, 1924. 
 
 
 2. 
 
 Definitions. 
 
 
 2. Definitions.- (1) In this Act, unless there is anything 
 repugnant in the subject or context,-- 
 
 4* * * * 
* 
 
 (b) "Commissioner" means a Commissioner for Workmen's 
 Compensation appointed under section 20; 
 
 (c) "compensation" means compensation as provided for by 
 this Act; 
 
 5*[(d) "dependant" means any of the following relatives of a 
 deceased workman, namely:-- 
 
 (i) a widow, a minor legitimate son, and unmarried 
 legitimate daughter, or a widowed mother; and 
 
 (ii) if wholly dependent on the earnings of the 
 workman at the time of his death, a son or a daughter 
 who has attained the age of 18 years and who is infirm; 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. This Act has been extended to Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 12 of 
 1962, s. 3 and Sch.; Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 
 2 and Sch. I; Pondicherry by Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 and Sch. I 
 and Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands by Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 
 3 and Sch. This Act has been modified in its application to 
 apprentices under the Apprentices Act, 1961 (52 of 1961) by s. 16 

 
2
 and Sch. to that Act. 
 2. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for sub-section (2). 
 3. The words "except the State of Jammu and Kashmir" omitted by Act 
 51 of 1970, s. 2 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-9-1971). 
 4. Cl. (a) omitted by Act 8 of 1959, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-6-1959). 
 5. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for the former clause (w.e.f. 1-6-1959). 
 
 14 
 
 (iii) if wholly or in part dependent on the 
 earnings of the workman at the time of his 
 death, 
 
 (a) a widower, 
 
 (b) a parent other than a widowed mother, 
 
 (c) a minor illegitimate son, an unmarried 
 illegitimate daughter or a daughter 
 legitimate or illegitimate if married and 
 a minor or if widowed and a minor, 
 
 (d) a minor brother or a unmarried sister or 
 a widowed sister if a minor, 
 
 (e) a widowed daughter-in-law, 
 
 (f) a minor child of a pre-deceased son, 
 
 (g) a minor child of a pre-deceased daughter 
 where no parent of the child is alive, or 
 
 (h) a paternal grandparent if no parent of 
 the workman is alive;] 
 
 (e) "employer" includes any body of persons whether 
 incorporated or not and any managing agent of an 
 employer and the legal representative of a deceased 
 employer, and, when the services of workman are 
 temporarily lent or let on hire to another person by 
 the person with whom the workman has entered into a 
 contract of service or apprenticeship means such other 
 person while the workman is working for him; 
 
 (f) "managing agent" means any person appointed or acting as 
 the representative of another person for the purpose of 
 carrying on such other person's trade or business, but 
 does not include an individual manager subordinate to 
 an employer1*; 
 
 2*[(ff) "minor" means a person who has not attained the age 
 of 18 years;] 
 
 (g) "partial disablement" means, where the disablement is of 
 a temporarp nature, such disablement as reduces the 
 earning capacity of a workman in any employment in 
 which he was engaged at the time of the accident 
 resulting in 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. In the application of the Act to Bengal, a new clause (ff) has 
 been ins. here by the Workmen's Compensation (Bengal Amendment) 
 Act, 1942 (Ben. 6 of 1942), s. 3. 
 2. Ins. by Act 8 of 1959, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-6-1959). 
 
 15 
 
 the disablement, and, where the disablement is of a 
 permanent nature, such disablement as reduces his 
 earning capacity in every employment which he was 
 capable of undertaking at that time: provided that 
 every injury specified 1*[in Part II of Schedule I] 
 shall be deemed to result in permanent partial 
 disablement; 

 
3
 
 (h) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
 Act; 
 
 (i) "qualified medical practitioner" means any person 
 registered 2*** under any 3*[Central Act, Provincial 
 Act or an Act of the Legislature of a 4*[State]] 
 providing for the maintenance of a register of medical 
 practitioners, or, in any area where no such last- 
 mentioned Act is in force, any person declared by the 
 State Government, by notification in the Official 
 Gazette, to be a qualified medical practitioner for the 
 purposes of this Act; 
 
 5* * * * * 
 
 (k) "seaman" means any person forming part of the crew of 
 any 6*** ship, but does not include the master of 
 7*[the] ship; 
 
 (l) "total disablement" means such disablement, whether of a 
 temporary or permanent nature, as incapacitates a 
 workman for all work which he was capable of performing 
 at the time of the accident resulting in such 
 disablement: 
 
 8*[Provided that permanent total disablement shall be deemed 
 to result from every injury specified in Part I of 
 Schedule I or from any combination of injuries 
 specified in Part II thereof where the aggregate 
 percentage of the loss of earning capacity, as 
 specified in the said Part II against those injuries, 
 amounts to one hundred per cent or more;] 
 
 (m) "wages" includes any privilege or benefit which is 
 capable of being estimated in money, other than a 
 travelling allowance 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. Subs. by Act 64 of 1962, s. 2, for "in Schedule I" (w.e.f. 1-2- 
 1963). 
 2. The words "under the Medical Act, 1858, or any Act amending the 
 same, or" omitted by Act 8 of 1959, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-6-1959). 
 3. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for "Act of the Central Legislature or 
 of any Legislature in a Province of India". 
 4. Subs. by the Adaptation of Laws (No. 3) Order, 1956, for "Part A 
 State or Part B State". 
 5. Cl. (j) rep. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 2. 
 6. The word "registered" omitted by s. 2, ibid. 
 7. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for "any such". 
 8. Subs. by Act 64 of 1962, s. 2, for the proviso (w.e.f. 1-2-1963). 
 
 16 
 
 or the value of any travelling concession or a 
 contribution paid by the employer of a workman towards 
 any pension or provident fund or a sum paid to a 
 workman to cover any special expenses entailed on him 
 by the nature of his employment; 
 
 (n) "workman" means any person (other than a person whose 
 employment is of a casual nature and who is employed 
 otherwise than for the purposes of the employer's trade 
 or business) who is-- 
 
 (i) a railway servant as defined in section 3 of 
 the Indian Railways Act, 1890 (9 of 1890), not 
 permanently employed in any administrative, district or 
 sub-divisional office of a railway and not employed in 
 any such capacity as is specified in Schedule II, or 
 
 (ii) employed 1*** 2*** in any such capacity as 
 is specified in Schedule II. 
 

 
4
 whether the contract of employment was made before or 
 after the passing of this Act and whether such contract 
 is expressed or implied, oral or in writing; but does 
 not include any person working in the capacity of a 
 member of 3*[the Armed Forces of the Union] 4***; 
 and any reference to a workman who has been injured 
 shall, where the workman is dead, include a reference 
 to his dependants or any of them. 
 
 (2) The exercise and performance of the powers and duties of a 
 local authority or of any department 5*[acting on behalf of 
 the Government] shall, for the purposes of this Act, unless a 
 contrary intention appears, be deemed to be the trade or business 
 of such authority or department. 
 
 6*[(3) The 7*[State Government], after giving, by notification 8* 
 in the Official Gazette, not less than three months' notice of its 
 intention 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. The word " either by way of manual labour or" rep. by Act 15 of 
 1933, s. 2. 
 2. Omitted by Act 22 of 1984, s. 2 (w.e.f 1-7-1984). 
 3. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for "His Majesty's naval, military or 
 air forces". 
 4. The words "or of the Royal Indian Marine Service" rep. by the 
 A. O. 1937. 
 5. Subs., ibid., for "of the Government". 
 6. Subs. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 2, for the original sub-section. 
 7. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for "G. G. in C". 
 8. For such a notification, see Gazette of India, 1935. Pt. I. 
 p. 745. 
 
 17 
 
 so to do, may, by a like notification, add to Schedule II any class of 
 persons employed in any occupation which it is satisfied is a 
 hazardous occupation, and the provisions of this Act shall thereupon 
 apply 1*[within the State] to such classes of persons: 
 
 Provided that in making such addition the 2*[State Government] 
 may direct that the provisions of this Act shall apply to such classes 
 of persons in respect of specified injuries only.] 
 
 
 CHAP 
 
 WORKMEN'S COMPENSATION 
 
 
 CHAPTER II 
 
 WORKMEN'S COMPENSATION 
 
 
 3. 
 
 Employer's liability for compensation. 
 
 
 3. Employer's liability for compensation.- (1) If personal injury 
 is caused to a workman by accident arising out of and in the course of 
 his employment, his employer shall be liable to pay compensation in 
 accordance with the provisions of this Chapter: 
 
 Provided that the employer shall not be so liable-- 
 
 (a) in respect of any injury which does not result in the 
 total or partial disablement of the workman for a 
 period exceeding 3*[three] days; 
 
 (b) in respect of any 4*[injury, not resulting in death, 
 caused by] an accident which is directly attributable 
 to-- 

 
5
 
 (i) the workman having been at the time thereof 
 under the influence of drink or drugs, or 
 
 (ii) the wilful disobedience of the workman to an 
 order expressly given, or to a rule expressly framed, 
 for the purpose of securing the safety of workmen, or 
 
 (iii) the wilful removal or disregard by the 
 workman of any safety guard or other device which he 
 knew to have been provided for the purpose of securing 
 the safety of workmen. 5*** 
 
 5* * * * * 
 
 6*[(2) If a workman employed in any employment specified in Part 
 A of Schedule III contracts any disease specified therein as an 
 occupational disease peculiar to that employment, or if a workman, 
 whilst in the service of an employer in whose service he has been 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. Ins. by the A. O. 1937. 
 2. Subs., ibid., for "G. G. in C.". 
 3. Subs. by Act 8 of 1959, s. 3, for "seven" (w.e.f. 1-6-1959). 
 4. Subs. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 3, for "injury to a workman resulting 
 from". 
 5. The word "or" and cl. (c) rep. by Act 5 of 1929, s. 2. 
 6. Subs. by Act 8 of 1959, s. 3, for sub-sections (2) and (3) 
 (w.e.f. 1-6-1959). 
 
 18 
 
 employed for a continuous period of not less than six months (which 
 period shall not include a period of service under any other employer 
 in the same kind of employment) in any employment specified in Part B 
 of Schedule III, contracts any disease specified therein as an 
 occupational disease peculiar to that employment, or if a workman 
 whilst in the service of one or more employers in any employment 
 specified in Part C of Schedule III for such continuous period as the 
 Central Government may specify in respect of each such employment, 
 contracts any disease specified therein as an occupational disease 
 peculiar to that employment, the contracting of the disease shall be 
 deemed to be an injury by accident within the meaning of this section 
 and, unless the contrary is proved, the accident shall be deemed to 
 have arisen out of, and in the course of, the employment: 
 
 1*[Provided that if it is proved,-- 
 
 (a) that a workman whilst in the service of one or more 
 employers in any employment specified in Part C of 
 Schedule III has contracted a disease specified therein 
 as an occupational disease peculiar to that employment 
 during a continuous period which is less than the 
 period specified under this sub-section for that 
 employment, and 
 
 (b) that the disease has arisen out of and in the course of 
 the employment; 
 
 the contracting of such disease shall be deemed to be an injury by 
 accident within the meaning of this section: 
 
 Provided further that if it is proved that a workman who having 
 served under any employer in any employment specified in Part B of 
 Schedule III or who having served under one or more employers in any 
 employment specified in Part C of that Schedule, for a continuous 
 period specified under this sub-section for that employment and he has 
 after the cessation of such service contracted any disease specified 
 in the said Part B or the said Part C, as the case may be, as an 
 occupational disease peculiar to the employment and that such disease 
 arose out of the employment, the contracting of the disease shall be 
 deemed to be an injury by accident within the meaning of this 
 section.] 
 

 
6
 3*[(2A) If a workman employed in any employment specified in Part 
 C of Schedule III contracts any occupational disease peculiar to that 
 employment, the contracting whereof is deemed to be an injury by 
 accident within the meaning of this section, and such employment 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. Ins. by Act 64 of 1962, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-2-1963). 
 2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for sub-section (2A) (w.e.f. 1-2-1963). 
 
 19 
 
 was under more than one employer, all such employers shall be liable 
 for the payment of the compensation in such proportion as the 
 Commissioner may, in the circumstances, deem just.] 
 
 (3) The State Government in the case of employments specified in 
 Part A and Part B of Schedule III, and the Central Government in the 
 case of employments specified in Part C of that Schedule, after 
 giving, by notification in the Official Gazette, not less than three 
 months' notice of its intention so to do, may, by a like notification, 
 add any description of employment to the employments specified in 
 Schedule III, and shall specify in the case of employments so added 
 the diseases which shall be deemed for the purposes of this section to 
 be occupational diseases peculiar to those employments respectively, 
 and thereupon the provisions of sub-section (2) shall apply 1*** as if 
 such diseases had been declared by this Act to be occupational 
 diseases peculiar to those employments.] 
 
 (4) Save as provided by 2*[sub-sections (2), (2A)] and (3), no 
 compensation shall be payable to a workman in respect of any disease 
 unless the disease is 3*** directly attributable to a specific injury 
 by accident arising out of and in the course of his employment. 
 
 (5) Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to confer any right 
 to compensation on a workman in respect of any injury if he has 
 instituted in a Civil Court a suit for damages in respect of the 
 injury against the employer or any other person; and no suit for 
 damages shall be maintainable by a workman in any Court of law in 
 respect of any injury-- 
 
 (a) if he has instituted a claim to compensation in respect 
 of the injury before a Commissioner; or 
 
 (b) if an agreement has been come to between the workman and 
 his employer providing for the payment of compensation 
 in respect of the injury in accordance with the 
 provisions of this Act. 
 
 
 4. 
 
 Amount of compensation. 
 
 
 4*[4. Amount of compensation.- (1) Subject to the provisions of 
 this Act, the amount of compensation shall be as follows, namely:-- 
 
 (a) where death results an amount equal to forty per 
 from the injury cent. of the monthly wages 
 of the deceased workman 
 multiplied by the relevant 
 factor; 
 
 or 
 
 an amount of twenty thousand 
 rupees, 
 whichever is more; 
 
 (b) Where permanent total an amount equal to fifty per 
 disablement results from cent. of the monthly wages 
 the injury of the injured workman 
 multiplied by the relevant 
 factor; 

 
7
 or 
 
 .0 an amount of twenty-four 
 thousand rupees, 
 
 whichever is more; 
 
 Explanation I.--For the purposes of clause (a) and clause (b), 
 "relevant factor", in relation to a workman means the factor specified 
 in the second column of Schedule IV against the entry in the first 
 column of that Schedule specifying the number of years which are the 
 same as the completed years of the age of the workman on his last 
 birthday immediately preceding the date on which the compensation fell 
 due; 
 
 Explanation II.--Where the monthly wages of a workman exceed one 
 thousand rupees, his monthly wages for the purposes of clause (a) and 
 clause (b) shall be deemed to be one thousand rupees only, 
 
 (c) Where parmanent partial (i) in the case of an injury 
 disablement results from specified in Part II of Schedule 
 the injury I, such percentage of the 
 compensation which would have 
 been payable in the case of 
 permanent total disablement as 
 is specified therein as being 
 the percentage of the loss of 
 earning capacity caused by that 
 injury, and 
 
 (ii) in the case of an injury not 
 pecified in Schedule I, such 
 percentage of the compensation 
 payable in the case of permanent 
 total disablement as is propor- 
 tionate to the loss of earning 
 capacity (as assessed by the 
 qualified medical practitioner) 
 permanently caused by the inj- 
 ury; 
 
 Explanation I.--Where more injuries than one are caused by the 
 same accident, the amount of compensation payable under this head 
 shall be aggregated but not so in any case as to exceed the amount 
 which would have been payable if permanent total disablement had 
 resulted from the injuries; 
 
 Explanation II.--In assessing the loss of earning capacity for 
 the purposes of sub-clause (ii), the qualified medical practitioner 
 shall have due regard to the percentages of loss of earning capacity 
 in relation to different injuries specified in Schedule I; 
 
 (d) Where temporary disable- a half-monthly payment of the 
 ment, whether total or sum equivalent to twenty-five 
 partial result from the per cent. of monthly wages of 
 injury the workman, to be paid in accor- 
 dance with the provisions of sub- 
 section 2. 
 (2) The half-monthly payment referred to in clause (d) of sub- 
 section (1) shall be payable on the sixteenth day-- 
 
 (i) from the date of disablement where such disablement 
 lasts for a period of twenty-eight days or more, or 
 
 (ii) after the expiry of a waiting period of three days from 
 the date of disablement where such disablement lasts for a period 
 of less than twenty-eight days; and thereafter half-monthly 
 during the disablement or during a period of five years, 
 whichever period is shorter: 
 
 Provided that-- 
 
 (a) there shall be deducted from any lump sum or half- 

 
8
 monthly payments to which the workman is entitled the amount of 
 any payment or allowance which the workman has received from the 
 employer by way of compensation during the period of disablement 
 prior to the receipt of such lump sum or of the first half- 
 monthly payment, as the case may be; and 
 
 (b) no half-monthly payment shall in any case exceed the 
 amount, if any, by which half the amount of the monthly wages of 
 the workman before the accident exceeds half the amount of such 
 wages which he is earning after the accident. 
 
 Explanation.--Any payment or allowance which the workman has 
 received from the employer towards his medical treatment shall not be 
 deemed to be a payment or allowance received by him by way of 
 compensation within the meaning of clause (a) of the proviso. 
 
 (3) On the ceasing of the disablement before the date on which 
 any half-monthly payment falls due, there shall be payable in respect 
 of that half-month a sum proportionate to the duration of the 
 disablement in that half-month.] 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. Certain words omitted by Act 51 of 1970, s. 2 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1- 
 9-1971). 
 2. Subs. by Act 8 of 1959, s. 3, for "sub-sections (2)" (w.e.f. 1-6- 
 1959). 
 3. The words "solely and" rep. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 3. 
 4. Subs. by Act 22 of 1984, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-7-1984). 
 
 21 
 
 
 4A. 
 
 Compensation to be paid when due and penalty for default. 
 
 
 1*[4A. Compensation to be paid when due and penalty for default.- 
 (1) Compensation under section 4 shall be paid as soon as it falls 
 due. 
 
 (2) In cases where the employer does not accept the liability for 
 compensation to the extent claimed, he shall be bound to make 
 provisional payment based on the extent of liability which he accepts, 
 and, such payment shall be deposited with the Commissioner or made to 
 the workman, as the case may be, without prejudice to the right of the 
 workman to make any further claim. 
 
 (3) Where any employer is in default in paying the compensation 
 due under this Act within one month from the date it fell due, the 
 Commissioner may direct that, in addition to the amount of the 
 arrears, simple interest at the rate of six per cent. per annum on the 
 amount due together with, if in the opinion of the Commissioner there 
 is no justification for the delay, a further sum not exceeding fifty 
 per cent. of such amount, shall be recovered from the employer by way 
 of penalty.] 
 
 
 5. 
 
 Method of calculating wages. 
 
 
 2*5. Method of calculating wages.- 3*[In this Act and for the 
 purposes thereof the expression "monthly wages" means the amount of 
 wages deemed to be payable for a month's service (whether the wages 
 are payable by the month or by whatever other period or at piece 
 rates), and calculated] as follows, namely:-- 
 
 (a) where the workman has, during a continuous period of not 
 less than twelve months immediately preceding the 
 accident, been in the service of the employer who is 
 liable to pay compensation, the monthly wages of the 
 workman shall be one-twelfth of the total wages which 

 
9
 have fallen due for payment to him by the employer in 
 the last twelve months of that period; 
 
 4*[(b) where the whole of the continuous period of service 
 immediately preceding the accident during which the 
 workman was in the service of the employer who is 
 liable to pay the compensation was less than one month, 
 the monthly wages of the workman shall be 5*** the 
 average monthly amount which, during the twelve 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. Ins. by Act 8 of 1959, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1-6-1959). 
 2. The original s. 5 renumbered as sub-section (1) of that section 
 by Act 5 of 1929, s. 3. The brackets and figure "(1)" rep. by Act 
 9 of 1938, s. 4. 
 3. Subs. by Act 13 of 1939, s. 2 (w.e.f. 30-6-1934), for "For the 
 purposes of this Act the monthly wages of a workman shall 
 be calaucated" the words in italics subs. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 
 5, for "section 4". 
 4. Ins. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 5. 
 5. The words "deemed to be" rep. by Act 13 of 1939, s. 2 (w.e.f. 30- 
 6-1934). 
 
 22 
 
 months immediately preceding the accident, was being 
 earned by a workman employed on the same work by the 
 same employer, or, if there was no workman so employed, 
 by a workman employed on similar work in the same 
 locality]; 
 
 1*[(c)] 2*[in other cases [including cases in which it is 
 not possible for want of necessary information to 
 calculate the monthly wages under clause (b)]], the 
 monthly wages shall be thirty times the total wages 
 earned in respect of the last continuous period of 
 service immediately preceding the accident from the 
 employer who is liable to pay compensation, divided by 
 the number of days comprising such period. 
 
 3* * * * * 
 
 Explanation.--A period of service shall, for the purposes of 
 4*[this 5*[section]] be deemed to be continuous which has not been 
 interrupted by a period of absence from work exceeding fourteen days. 
 
 6* * * * * 
 
 
 6. 
 
 Review. 
 
 
 6. Review.- (1) Any half-monthly payment payable under this Act, 
 either under an agreement between the parties or under the order of a 
 Commissioner, may be reviewed by the Commissioner, on the application 
 either of the employer or of the workman accompanied by the 
 certificate of a qualified medical practitioner that there has been a 
 change in the condition of the workman or, subject to rules made under 
 this Act, on application made without such certificate. 
 
 (2) Any half-monthly payment may, on review under this section, 
 subject to the provisions of this Act, be continued, increased, 
 decreased or ended, or if the accident is found to have resulted in 
 permanent disablement, be converted to the lump sum to which the 
 workman is entitled less any amount which he has already received by 
 way of half-monthly payments. 
 
 
 7. 
 
 Commutation of half-monthly payments. 
 

 
10
 
 7. Commutation of half-monthly payments.- Any right to receive 
 half-monthly payments may, by agreement between the parties or, if the 
 parties cannot agree and the payments have been continued for not less 
 than six months, on the application of either party to the 
 Commissioner be redeemed by the 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. The original cl. (b) relettered (c) by Act 15 of 1933, s. 5. 
 2. Subs. by Act 8 of 1959, s. 6, for "in other cases" (w.e.f. 1-6- 
 1959). 
 3. The proviso rep. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 5. 
 4. Subs. by Act 5 of 1929, s. 3 for "this section". 
 5. Subs. by Act 9 of 1938, s. 4, for "sub-section". 
 6. Sub-section (2) ins. by Act 5 of 1929, s. 3, rep. by Act 15 of 
 1933, s. 5. 
 
 23 
 
 payment of a lump sum of such amount as may be agreed to by the 
 parties or determined by the Commissioner, as the case may be. 
 
 
 8. 
 
 Distribution of compensation. 
 
 
 8. Distribution of compensation.- 1*[(1) No payment of 
 compensation in respect of a workman whose injury has resulted in 
 death, and no payment of a lump sum as compensation to a woman or a 
 person under a legal disability, shall be made otherwise than by 
 deposit with the Commissioner, and no such payment made directly by an 
 employer shall be deemed to be a payment of compensation: 
 
 2*[Provided that, in the case of a deceased workman, an employer 
 may make to any dependant advances on account of compensation not 
 exceeding an aggregate of one hundred rupees, and so much of such 
 aggregate as does not exceed the compensation payable to that 
 dependant shall be deducted by the Commissioner from such compensation 
 and repaid to the employer.] 
 
 (2) Any other sum amounting to not less than ten rupees which is 
 payable as compensation may be deposited with the Commissioner on 
 behalf of the person entitled thereto. 
 
 (3) The receipt of the Commissioner shall be a sufficient 
 discharge in respect of any compensation deposited with him.] 
 
 (4) On the deposit of any money under sub-section (1) 3*[as 
 compensation in respect of a deceased workman] the Commissioner 
 4*[shall deduct] therefrom the actual cost of the workman's funeral 
 expenses, to an amount not exceeding 5*[fifty rupees] and pay the same 
 to the person by whom such expenses were incurred, and shall, if he 
 thinks necessary, cause notice to be published or to be served on each 
 dependant in such manner as he thinks fit, calling upon the dependants 
 to appear before him on such date as he may fix for determining the 
 distribution of the compensation. If the Commissioner is satisfied 
 after any inquiry which he may deem necessary, that no dependant 
 exists, he shall repay the balance of the money to the employer by 
 whom it was paid. The Commissioner shall, on application by the 
 employer, furnish a statement showing in detail all disbursements 
 made. 
 
 6*[(5) Compensation deposited in respect of a deceased workman 
 shall, subject to any deduction made under sub-section (4), be 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. Subs. by Act 5 of 1929, s. 4, for original sub-sections (1) to 
 (3). 
 2. Subs. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 6, for the original proviso. 
 3. Ins. by Act 5 of 1929, s. 4. 
 4. Subs. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 6, for "may deduct". 
 5. Subs. by Act 8 of 1959, s. 7, for "twenty-five rupees" (w.e.f. 1- 
 6-1959). 

 
11
 6. Sub-sections (5) to (7) subs. by Act 5 of 1929, s. 4, for the 
 original sub-section (5). 
 
 24 
 
 apportioned among the dependants of the deceased workman or any of 
 them in such proportion as the Commissioner thinks fit, or may, in the 
 discretion of the Commissioner, be allotted to any one dependant. 
 
 (6) Where any compensation deposited with the Commissioner is 
 payable to any person, the Commissioner shall, if the person to whom 
 the compensation is payable is not a woman or a person under a legal 
 disability, and may, in other cases, pay the money to the person 
 entitled thereto. 
 
 (7) Where any lump sum deposited with the Commissioner is payable 
 to a woman or a person under a legal disability, such sum may be 
 invested, applied or otherwise dealt with for the benefit of the 
 woman, or of such person during his disability, in such manner as the 
 Commissioner may direct; and where a half-monthly payment is payable 
 to any person under a legal disability, the Commissioner may, of his 
 own motion or on an application made to him in this behalf, order that 
 the payment be made during the disability to any dependant of the 
 workman or to any other person, whom the Commissioner thinks best 
 fitted to provide for the welfare of the workman.] 
 
 1*[(8)] Where, on application made to him in this behalf or 
 otherwise, the Commissioner is satisfied that, on account of neglect 
 of children on the part of a parent or on account of the variation of 
 the circumstances of any dependant or for any other sufficient cause, 
 an order of the Commissioner as to the distribution of any sum paid as 
 compensation or as to the manner in which any sum payable to any such 
 dependant is to be invested, applied or otherwise dealt with, ought to 
 be varied, the Commissioner may make such orders for the variation of 
 the former order as he thinks just in the circumstances of the case: 
 
 Provided that no such order prejudicial to any person shall be 
 made unless such person has been given an opportunity of showing cause 
 why the order should not be made, or shall be made in any case in 
 which it would involve the repayment by a dependant of any sum already 
 paid to him. 
 
 2*[(9) Where the Commissioner varies any order under sub-section 
 (8) by reason of the fact that payment of compensation to any person 
 has been obtained by fraud, impersonation or other improper means, any 
 amount so paid to or on behalf of such person may be recovered in the 
 manner hereinafter provided in section 31.] 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. The original sub-section (6) renumbered (8) by Act 5 of 
1929, 
 s. 4. 
 2. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. 
 
 25 
 
 
 9. 
 
 Compensation not to be assigned, attached or charged. 
 
 
 9. Compensation not to be assigned, attached or charged.- Save as 
 provided by this Act, no lump sum or half-monthly payment payable 
 under this Act shall in any way be capable of being assigned or 
 charged or be liable to attachment or pass to any person other than 
 the workman by operation of law, nor shall any claim be set off 
 against the same. 
 
 
 10. 
 
 Notice and claim. 
 

 
12
 
 10. Notice and claim.- (1) 1*[No claim for compensation shall be 
 entertained by a Commissioner unless notice of the accident has been 
 given in the manner hereinafter provided as soon as practicable after 
 the happening thereof and unless the claim is preferred before him 
 within 2*[two years] of the occurrence of the accident or, in case of 
 death, within 2*[two years] from the date of death:] 
 
 Provided that, where the accident is the contracting of a disease 
 in respect of which the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 3 are 
 applicable, the accident shall be deemed to have occurred on the first 
 of the days during which the workman was continuously absent from work 
 in consequence of the disablement caused by the disease: 
 
 3*[Provided further that in case of partial disablement due to 
 the contracting of any such disease and which does not force the 
 workman to absent himself from work, the period of two years shall be 
 counted from the day the workman gives notice of the disablement to 
 his employer: 
 
 Provided further that if a workman who, having been employed in 
 an employment for a continuous period, specified under sub-section (2) 
 of section 3 in respect of that employment, ceases to be so employed 
 and develops symptoms of an occupational disease peculiar to that 
 employment within two years of the cessation of employment, the 
 accident shall be deemed to have occurred on the day on which the 
 symptoms were first detected:] 
 
 4*[Provided further that the want of or any defect or 
 irregularity in a notice shall not be a bar to the 5*[entertainment of 
 a claim]-- 
 
 (a) if the claim is 6*[preferred] in respect of the death of 
 a workman resulting from an accident which occurred on 
 the premises of the employer, or at any place where the 
 workman at the time of the accident was working under 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. Subs. by Act 9 of 1938, s. 5, for the original words. 
 2. Subs. by Act 8 of 1959, s. 8, for "one year" (w.e.f. 1-6-1959). 
 3. Ins. by Act 64 of 1962, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1-2-1963). 
 4. Ins. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 7. 
 5. Subs. by Act 9 of 1938, s. 5, for "maintenance of proceedings". 
 6. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for "made". 
 
 26 
 
 the control of the employer or of any person employed 
 by him, and the workman died on such premises or at 
 such place, or on any premises belonging to the 
 employer, or died without having left the vicinity of 
 the premises or place where the accident occurred, or 
 
 (b) if the employer 1*[or any one of several employers or 
 any person responsible to the employer for the 
 management of any branch of the trade or business in 
 which the injured workman was employed] had knowledge 
 of the accident from any other source at or about the 
 time when it occurred: 
 
 Provided further, that the Commissioner may 2*[entertain] and 
 decide any claim to compensation in any case notwithstanding that the 
 notice has not been given, or the claim has not been 3*[preferred], in 
 due time as provided in this sub-section, if he is satisfied that the 
 failure so to give the notice or 4*[prefer] the claim, as the case may 
 be, was due to sufficient cause. 
 
 (2) Every such notice shall give the name and address of the 
 person injured and shall state in ordinary language the cause of the 
 injury and the date on which the accident happened, and shall be 
 served on the employer or upon 5*[any one of] several employers, or 
 upon any person 6*** responsible to the employer for the management 
 of any branch of the trade or business in which the injured workman 
 was employed. 

 
13
 
 7*[(3) The State Government may require that any prescribed class 
 of employers shall maintain at their premises at which workmen are 
 employed a notice-book, in the prescribed form, which shall be readily 
 accessible at all reasonable times to any injured workman employed on 
 the premises and to any person acting bona fide on his behalf. 
 
 (4) A notice under this section may be served by delivering it 
 at, or sending it by registered post addressed to, the residence or 
 any office or place of business of the person on whom it is to be 
 served, or, where a notice-book is maintained, by entry in the notice- 
 book.] 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. Ins. by Act 9 of 1938, s. 5. 
 2. Subs. by s 5, ibid., for "admit". 
 3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for "instituted". 
 4. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for "institute". 
 5. Subs. by Act 7 of 1924, s. 2 and Sch. I, for "any one or". 
 6. The word "directly" rep. by Act 9 of 1938, s. 5. 
 7. Subs. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 7, for the original sub-section (3). 
 
 26A 
 
 
 10A. 
 
 Power to require from employers statements regarding fatal accidents. 
 
 
 1*[10A. Power to require from employers statements regarding 
 fatal accidents.- (1) Where a Commissioner receives information from 
 any source that a workman has died as a result of an accident arising 
 out of and in the course of his employment, he may send by registered 
 post a notice to the workman's employer requiring him to submit, 
 within thirty days of the service of the notice, a statement, in the 
 prescribed form, giving the circumstances attending the death of the 
 workman, and indicating whether, in the opinion of the employer, he is 
 or is not liable to deposit compensation on account of the death. 
 
 (2) If the employer is of opinion that he is liable to deposit 
 compensation, he shall make the deposit within thirty days of the 
 service of the notice. 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. Ss. 10A and 10B ins. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 8. 
 
 27 
 
 (3) If the employer is of opinion that he is not liable to 
 deposit compensation, he shall in his statement indicate the grounds 
 on which he disclaims liability. 
 
 (4) Where the employer has so disclaimed liability, the 
 Commissioner, after such enquiry as he may think fit, may inform any 
 of the dependants of the deceased workman, that it is open to the 
 dependants to prefer a claim for compensation, and may give them such 
 other further information as he may think fit. 
 
 
 10B. 
 
 Reports of fatal accidents and serious bodily injuries. 
 
 
 10B. Reports of fatal accidents and serious bodily injuries.- (1) 
 Where, by any law for the time being in force, notice is required to 
 be given to any authority, by or on behalf of an employer, of any 
 accident occurring on his premises which results in death 1*[or 
 serious bodily injury], the person required to give the notice shall, 
 within seven days of the death 1*[or serious bodily injury], send a 
 report to the Commissioner giving the circumstances attending the 
 death 1*[or serious bodily injury]: 
 
 Provided that where the State Government has so prescribed the 

 
14
 person required to give the notice may instead of sending such report 
 to the Commissioner send it to the authority to whom he is required to 
 give the notice. 
 
 1*[Explanation.--"Serious bodily injury" means an injury which 
 involves, or in all probability will involve the permanent loss of the 
 use of, or permanent injury to, any limb, or the permanent loss of or 
 injury to the sight or hearing, or the fracture of any limb, or the 
 enforced absence of the injured person from work for a period 
 exceeding twenty days.] 
 
 (2) The State Government may, by notification in the Official 
 Gazette, extend the provisions of sub-section (1) to any class of 
 premises other than those coming within the scope of that sub-section, 
 and may, by such notification, specify the persons who shall send the 
 report to the Commissioner. 
 
 1*[(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to factories to which 
 the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948, (34 of 1948.) applies.]] 
 
 
 11. 
 
 Medical examination. 
 
 
 11. Medical examination.- (1) Where a workman has given notice of 
 an accident, he shall, if the employer, before the expiry of three 
 days from the time at which service of the notice has been effected, 
 offers to have him examined free of charge by a qualified medical 
 practitioner, submit himself for such examination, and any workman who 
 is in receipt of a half-monthly payment under this Act shall, if so 
 required, submit himself for such examination from time to time: 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. Ins. by Act 8 of 1959, s. 9 (w.e.f. 1-6-1959). 
 
 28 
 
 Provided that a workman shall not be required to submit himself 
 for examination by a medical practitioner otherwise than in accordance 
 with rules made under this Act, or at more frequent intervals than may 
 be prescribed. 
 
 (2) If a workman, on being required to do so by the employer 
 under sub-section (1) or by the Commissioner at any time, refuses to 
 submit himself for examination by a qualified medical practitioner or 
 in any way obstructs the same, his right to compensation shall be 
 suspended during the continuance of such refusal or obstruction 
 unless, in the case of refusal, he was prevented by any sufficient 
 cause from so submitting himself. 
 
 (3) If a workman, before the expiry of the period within which he 
 is liable under sub-section (1) to be required to submit himself for 
 medical examination, voluntarily leaves without having been so 
 examined the vicinity of the place in which he was employed, his right 
 to compensation shall be suspended until he returns and offers himself 
 for such examination. 
 
 (4) Where a workman, whose right to compensation has been 
 suspended under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3), dies without 
 having submitted himself for medical examination as required by either 
 of those sub-sections, the Commissioner may, if he thinks fit, direct 
 the payment of compensation to the dependants of the deceased workman. 
 
 (5) Where under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) a right to 
 compensation is suspended, no compensation shall be payable in respect 
 of the period of suspension, and, if the period of suspension 
 commences before the expiry of the waiting period referred to in 
 clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 4, the waiting period shall 
 be increased by the period during which the suspension continues. 
 
 (6) Where an injured workman has refused to be attended by a 
 qualified medical practitioner whose services have been offered to him 

 
15
 by the employer free of charge or having accepted such offer has 
 deliberately disregarded the instructions of such medical 
 practitioner, then, 1*[if it is proved that the workman has not 
 thereafter been regularly attended by a qualified medical practitioner 
 or having been so attended has deliberately failed to follow his 
 instructions and that such refusal, disregard or failure was 
 unreasonable] in the circumstances of the case and that the injury has 
 been aggravated thereby, the injury and resulting disablement shall be 
 deemed to be of the same nature and duration as they might reasonably 
 have 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. Subs. by Act 9 of 1938, s. 6, for the original words. 
 
 29 
 
 been expected to be if the workman had been regularly attended by a 
 qualified medical practitioner 1*[whose instructions he had followed], 
 and compensation, if any, shall be payable accordingly. 
 
 
 12. 
 
 Contracting. 
 
 
 12. Contracting.- (1) Where any person (hereinafter in this 
 section referred to as the principal) in the course of or for the 
 purposes of his trade or business contracts with any other person 
 (hereinafter in this section referred to as the contractor) for the 
 execution by or under the contractor of the whole or any part of any 
 work which is ordinarily part of the trade or business of the 
 principal, the principal shall be liable to pay to any workman 
 employed in the execution of the work any compensation which he would 
 have been liable to pay if that workman had been immediately employed 
 by him; and where compensation is claimed from the principal, this Act 
 shall apply as if references to the principal were substituted for 
 references to the employer except that the amount of compensation 
 shall be calculated with reference to the wages of the workman under 
 the employer by whom he is immediately employed. 
 
 (2) Where the principal is liable to pay compensation under this 
 section, he shall be entitled to be indemnified by the contractor, 
 2*[or any other person from whom the workman could have recovered 
 compensation and where a contractor who is himself a principal is 
 liable to pay compensation or to indemnify a principal under this 
 section he shall be entitled to be indemnified by any person standing 
 to him in the relation of a contractor from whom the workman could 
 have recovered compensation,] and all questions as to the right to and 
 the amount of any such indemnity shall, in default of agreement, be 
 settled by the Commissioner. 
 
 (3) Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing a 
 workman from recovering compensation from the contractor instead of 
 the principal. 
 
 (4) This section shall not apply in any case where the accident 
 occurred elsewhere than on, in or about the premises on which the 
 principal has undertaken or usually undertakes, as the case may be, to 
 execute the work or which are otherwise under his control or 
 management. 
 
 
 13. 
 
 Remedies of employer against stranger. 
 
 
 13. Remedies of employer against stranger.- Where a workman has 
 recovered compensation in respect of any injury caused under 
 circumstances creating a legal liability of some person other than the 
 person by whom the compensation was 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. Ins. by Act 9 of 1938, s. 6. 

 
16
 2. Ins. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 9. 
 
 30 
 
 paid to pay damages in respect thereof, the person by whom the 
 compensation was paid and any person who has been called on to pay an 
 indemnity under section 12 shall be entitled to be indemnified by the 
 person so liable to pay damages as aforesaid. 
 
 
 14. 
 
 Insolvency of employer. 
 
 
 14. Insolvency of employer.- (1) Where any employer has entered 
 into a contract with any insurers in respect of any liability under 
 this Act to any workman, then in the event of the employer becoming 
 insolvent or making a composition or scheme of arrangement with his 
 creditors or, if the employer is a company, in the event of the 
 company having commenced to be wound up, the rights of the employer 
 against the insurers as respects that liability shall, notwithstanding 
 anything in any law for the time being in force relating to insolvency 
 or the winding up of companies, be transferred to and vest in the 
 workman, and upon any such transfer the insurers shall have the same 
 rights and remedies and be subject to the same liabilities as if they 
 were the employer, so, however, that the insurers shall not be under 
 any greater liability to the workman than they would have been under 
 to the employer. 
 
 (2) If the liability of the insurers to the workman is less than 
 the liability of the employer to the workman, the workman may prove 
 for the balance in the insolvency proceedings or liquidation. 
 
 (3) Where in any case such as is referred to in sub-section (1) 
 the contract of the employer with the insurers is void or voidable by 
 reason of non-compliance on the part of the employer with any terms or 
 conditions of the contract (other than a stipulation for the payment 
 of premia), the provisions of that sub-section shall apply as if the 
 contract were not void or voidable, and the insurers shall be entitled 
 to prove in the insolvency proceedings or liquidation for the amount 
 paid to the workman: 
 
 Provided that the provisions of this sub-section shall not apply 
 in any case in which the workman fails to give notice to the insurers 
 of the happening of the accident and of any resulting disablement as 
 soon as practicable after he becomes aware of the institution of the 
 insolvency or liquidation proceedings. 
 
 (4) There shall be deemed to be included among the debts which 
 under section 49 of the Presidency-towns Insolvency Act, 1909 (3 of 
 1909), or under section 61 of the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920 (5 
 of 1920), or under section 230 of the 1*Indian Companies Act, 1913 (7 
 of 1913), are in the distribution of the property of an insolvent or 
 in the distribution of the assets 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. See now the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956). 
 
 31 
 
 of a company being wound up to be paid in priority to all other debts, 
 the amount due in respect of any compensation the liability where for 
 accrued before the date of the order of adjudication of the insolvent 
 or the date of the commencement of the winding up, as the case may be, 
 and those Acts shall have effect accordingly. 
 
 (5) Where the compensation is a half-monthly payment, the amount 
 due in respect thereof shall, for the purposes of this section, be 
 taken to be the amount of the lump sum for which the half-monthly 
 payment could, if redeemable, be redeemed if application were made for 
 that purpose under section 7, and a certificate of the Commissioner as 
 to the amount of such sum shall be conclusive proof thereof. 
 

 
17
 (6) The provisions of sub-section (4) shall apply in the case of 
 any amount for which an insurer is entitled to prove under sub-section 
 (3), but otherwise those provisions shall not apply where the 
 insolvent or the company being wound up has entered into such a 
 contract with insurers as is referred to in sub-section (1). 
 
 (7) This section shall not apply where a company is wound up 
 voluntarily merely for the purposes of reconstruction or of 
 amalgamation with another company. 
 
 
 14A. 
 
 Compensation to be first charge on assets transferred by employer. 
 
 
 1*[14A. Compensation to be first charge on assets transferred by 
 employer.-Where an employer transfers his assets before any amount due 
 in respect of any compensation, the liability wherefor accrued before 
 the date of the transfer, has been paid, such amount shall, 
 notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being 
 in force, be a first charge on that part of the assets so transferred 
 as consists of immovable property.] 
 
 
 15. 
 
 Special provisions relating to masters and seamen. 
 
 
 15. Special provisions relating to masters and seamen.- This Act 
 shall apply in the case of workmen who are masters of 2*** ships 
 
 or seamen subject to the following modifications, namely:-- 
 
 (1) The notice of the accident and the claim for compensation 
 may, except where the person injured is the master of the ship, be 
 served on the master of the ship as if he were the employer, but where 
 the accident happened and the disablement commenced on board the ship 
 it shall not be necessary for any seaman to give any notice of the 
 accident. 
 
 (2) In the case of the death of a master or seaman, the claim for 
 compensation shall be made within 3*[one year] after the news of 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. Ins. by Act 8 of 1959, s. 10 (w.e.f. 1-6-1959). 
 2. The word "registered" rep. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 10. 
 3. Subs. by Act 8 of 1959, s. 11, for "six months" (w.e.f. 1-6- 
 1959). 
 
 32 
 
 the death has been received by the claimant or, where the ship has 
 been or is deemed to have been lost with all hands, within eighteen 
 months of the date on which the ship was, or is deemed to have been, 
 so lost: 
 
 1*[Provided that the Commissioner may entertain any claim to 
 compensation in any case notwithstanding that the claim has not been 
 preferred in due time as provided in this sub-section, if he is 
 satisfied that the failure so to prefer the claim was due to 
 sufficient cause.] 
 
 (3) Where an injured master or seaman is discharged or left 
 behind in any part of 2*[India or] 3*[in any foreign country] any 
 depositions taken by any Judge or Magistrate in that part or by any 
 Consular Officer in the foreign country and transmitted by the person 
 by whom they are taken to the Central Government or any State 
 Government shall, in any proceedings for enforcing the claim, be 
 admissible in evidence-- 
 
 (a) if the deposition is authenticated by the signature of 
 the Judge, Magistrate or Consular Officer before whom 

 
18
 it is made; 
 
 (b) if the defendant or the person accused, as the case may 
 be, had an opportunity by himself or his agent to 
 crossexamine the witness; and 
 
 (c) if the deposition was made in the course of a criminal 
 proceeding, on proof that the deposition was made in 
 the presence of the person accused; 
 
 and it shall not be necessary in any case to prove the signature or 
 official character of the person appearing to have signed any such 
 deposition and a certificate by such person that the defendant or the 
 person accused had an opportunity of cross-examining the witness and 
 that the deposition if made in a criminal proceeding was made in the 
 presence of the person accused shall, unless the contrary is proved, 
 be sufficient evidence that he had that opportunity and that it was so 
 made. 
 
 4* * * * 
* 
 
 4*[(4) No 5*[half-monthly payment] shall be payable in respect of 
 the period during which the owner of the ship is, under any law 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. Added by Act 8 of 1959, s. 11 (w.e.f. 1-6-1959). 
 2. Ins. by the A. O. 1950. 
 3. Subs. by Act 22 of 1984, s. 4. (w.e.f. 1-7-1984) 
 4. The original cl. (4) rep., and the original cl. (5) renumbered 
 (4) by Act 9 of 1938, s. 7. 
 5. Subs. by Act 7 of 1924, s. 2 and Sch. I, for "monthly payment". 
 
 33 
 
 in force for the time being 1*** relating to merchant shipping, liable 
 to defray the expenses of maintenance of the injured master or seaman. 
 
 2*[(5) No compensation shall be payable under this Act in respect 
 of any injury in respect of which provision is made for payment of a 
 gratuity, allowance or pension under the War Pensions and Detention 
 Allowances (Mercantile Marine, etc.) Scheme, 1939, or the War Pensions 
 and Detention Allowances (Indian Seamen, etc.) Scheme, 1941, made 
 under the Pensions (Navy, Army, Air Force and Mercantile Marine) Act, 
 1939 ( 2 and 3 Geo. 6, c. 83), or under the War Pensions and Detention 
 Allowances (Indian Seamen) Scheme 1942, made by the Central 
 Government. 
 
 (6) Failure to give a notice or make a claim or commence 
 proceedings within the time required by this Act shall not be a bar to 
 the maintenance of proceedings under this Act in respect of any 
 personal injury, if-- 
 
 (a) an application has been made for payment in respect of 
 that injury under any of the schemes referred to in the 
 preceding clause, and 
 
 (b) the State Government certifies that the said application 
 was made in the reasonable belief that the injury was 
 one in respect of which the scheme under which the 
 application was made makes provision for payments, and 
 that the application was rejected or that payments made 
 in pursuance of the application were discontinued on 
 the ground that the injury was not such an injury, and 
 
 (c) the proceedings under this Act are commenced within one 
 month from the date on which the said certificate of 
 the State Government was furnished to the person 
 commencing the proceedings.] 
 
 
 16. 
 
 Returns as to compensation. 

 
19
 
 
 16. Returns as to compensation.- The 3*[State Government] may, by 
 notification in the Official Gazette, direct that every person 
 employing workmen, or that any specified class of such persons, shall 
 send at such time and in such form and to such authority, as may be 
 specified in the notification, a correct return specifying the number 
 of injuries in respect of which 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. The words "in Part A States and Part C States" omitted by Act 3 
 of 1951, s. 3, and Sch. 
 2. Subs. by Act 1 of 1942, s. 2 (w.e.f. 3-9-1939), for the former 
 cl. which had been ins. by Act 42 of 1939, s. 2 with effect from 
 the same date. 
 3. Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "G. G. in C.". 
 
 34 
 
 compensation has been paid by the employer during the previous year 
 and the amount of such compensation together with such other 
 particulars as to the compensation as the 1*[State Government] may 
 direct. 
 
 
 17. 
 
 Contracting out. 
 
 
 17. Contracting out.- Any contract or agreement whether made 
 before or after the commencement of this Act, whereby a workman 
 relinquishes any right of compensation from the employer for personal 
 injury arising out of or in the course of the employment, shall be 
 null and void in so far as it purports to remove or reduce the 
 liability of any person to pay compensation under this Act. 
 
 
 18. 
 
 [Repealed.] 
 
 
 18. [Proof of age.]- Rep. by the Workmen's Compensation 
 (Amendment) Act, 1959 (8 of 1959), s. 12 (w.e.f. 1-6-1959). 
 
 
 18A. 
 
 Penalties. 
 
 
 2*[18A. Penalties.- (1) Whoever-- 
 
 (a) fails to maintain a notice-book which he is required to 
 maintain under sub-section (3) of section 10, or 
 
 (b) fails to send to the Commissioner a statement which he 
 is required to send under sub-section (1) of section 
 10A, or 
 
 (c) fails to send a report which he is required to send 
 under section 10B, or 
 
 (d) fails to make a return which he is required to make 
 under section 16, 
 
 shall be punishable with fine which may extend to 3*[five hundred] 
 rupees. 
 
 (2) No prosecution under this section shall be instituted except 
 by or with the previous sanction of a Commissioner, and no Court shall 
 take cognizance of any offence under this section, unless complaint 
 thereof is made 4*[within six months of the date on which the alleged 

 
20
 commission of the offence came to the knowledge of the Commissioner].] 
 
 
 CHAP 
 
 COMMISSIONERS 
 
 
 CHAPTER III 
 
 COMMISSIONERS 
 
 
 19. 
 
 Reference to Commissioners. 
 
 
 19. Reference to Commissioners.-(1) If any question arises in any 
 proceedings under this Act as to the liability of any person to pay 
 compensation (including any 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. Subs. by the A. O. 1937 for "G. G. in C.". 
 2. S. 18A ins. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 11. 
 3. Subs. by Act 8 of 1959, s. 13, for "one hundred" (w.e.f. 1-6- 
 1959). 
 4. Subs. by Act 64 of 1962, s. 6, for certain words (w.e.f. 1-2- 
 1963). 
 
 35 
 
 question as to whether a person injured is or is not a workman) or as 
 to the amount or duration of compensation (including any question as 
 to the nature or extent of disablement), the question shall, in 
 default of agreement, be settled by 1*[a Commissioner]. 
 
 (2) No Civil Court shall have jurisdiction to settle, decide or 
 deal with any question which is by or under this Act required to be 
 settled, decided or dealt with by a Commissioner or to enforce any 
 liability incurred under this Act. 
 
 
 20. 
 
 Appointment of Commissioners. 
 
 
 20. Appointment of Commissioners.-(1) The State Government may, 
 by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint any person to be a 
 Commissioner for Workmen's Compensation for such 2*** area as may be 
 specified in the notification. 
 
 3*[(2) Where more than one Commissioner has been appointed for 
 any 2*** area, the State Government may, by general or special 
order, 
 regulate the distribution of business between them.] 
 
 3*[(3)] Any Commissioner may, for the purpose of deciding any 
 matter referred to him for decision under this Act, choose one or more 
 persons possessing special knowledge of any matter relevant to the 
 matter under inquiry to assist him in holding the inquiry. 
 
 3*[(4)] Every Commissioner shall be deemed to be a public servant 
 within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) 
 
 
 21. 
 
 Venue of procedings and transfer. 
 
 
 21. Venue of procedings and transfer.- (1) Where any matter is 
 under this Act to be done by or before a Commissioner, the same shall, 

 
21
 subject to the provisions of this Act and to any rules made hereunder, 
 be done by or before 4*[a Commissioner] for the 2*** area in which the 
 accident took place which resulted in the injury: 
 
 Provided that, where the workman is the master of a 5*** ship or 
 a seaman, any such matter may be done by or before 4*[a Commissioner] 
 for the 2* area in which the owner or agent of the ship resides or 
 carries on business. 
 
 (2) If a Commissioner is satisfied 6*[that any matter arising out 
 of any proceedings pending before him] can be more conveniently dealt 
 with by any other Commissioner, whether in the same State 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. Subs. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 12, for "the Commissioner". 
 2. The word "local" omitted by Act 64 of 1962, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1-2- 
 1963). 
 3. Sub-section (2) ins., and the original sub-sections (2) and (3) 
 renumbered (3) and (4) by Act 15 of 1933, s. 13. 
 4. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for "the Commissioner". 
 5. The word "registered" omitted by s. 14, ibid. 
 6. Subs. by Act 9 of 1938, s. 9, for "by any party to any 
 proceedings under this Act pending before him that such matter". 
 
 36 
 
 or not, he may subject to rules made under this Act, order such matter 
 to be transferred to such other Commissioner either for report or for 
 disposal, and, if he does so, shall forthwith transmit to such other 
 Commissioner all documents relevant for the decision of such matter 
 and, where the matter is transferred for disposal, shall also transmit 
 in the prescribed manner any money remaining in his hands or invested 
 by him for the benefit of any party to the proceedings: 
 
 1*[Provided that the Commissioner shall not, where any party to 
 the proceedings has appeared before him, make any order of transfer 
 relating to the distribution among dependants of a lump sum without 
 giving such party an opportunity of being heard:] 
 
 Provided 1*[further] that no matter other than a matter relating 
 to the actual payment to a workman or the distribution among 
 dependants of a lump sum shall be transferred for disposal under this 
 sub-section to a Commissioner in the same State save with the previous 
 sanction of the State Government or to a Commissioner in another State 
 save with the previous sanction of 2*[the State Government of that 
 State], unless all the parties to the proceedings agree to the 
 transfer. 
 
 (3) The commissioner to whom any matter is so transferred shall, 
 subject to rules made under this Act, inquire thereinto and, if the 
 matter was transferred for report, return his report thereon or, if 
 the matter was transferred for disposal, continue the proceedings as 
 if they had originally commenced before him. 
 
 (4) On receipt of a report from a Commissioner to whom any matter 
 has been transferred for report under sub-section (2), the 
 Commissioner by whom it was referred shall decide the matter referred 
 in conformity with such report. 
 
 3*[(5) The State Government may transfer any matter from any 
 Commissioner appointed by it to any other commissioner appointed by 
 it.] 
 
 
 22. 
 
 Form of application. 
 
 
 22. Form of application.-(1) No application for the settlement of 
 any matter by a Commissioner, 4*[other than an application by a 
 dependant or dependants for compensation] shall be made unless and 
 until some question has arisen between the parties in connection 
 therewith which they have been unable to settle by agreement. 

 
22
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. Ins. by Act 9 of 1938, s. 9. 
 2. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for "the G. G. in C.". 
 3. Ins. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 14. 
 4. Ins. by s. 15, ibid. 
 
 37 
 
 (2) 1*[An application to a Commissioner] may be made in such form 
 and shall be accompanied by such fee, if any, as may be prescribed, 
 and shall contain, in addition to any particulars which may be 
 prescribed, the following particulars, namely:-- 
 
 (a) a concise statement of the circumstances in which the 
 application is made and the relief or order which the 
 applicant claims; 
 
 (b) in the case of a claim for compensation against an 
 employer, the date of service of notice of the accident 
 on the employer and, if such notice has not been served 
 or has not been served in due time, the reason for such 
 omission; 
 
 (c) the names and addresses of the parties; and 
 
 (d) 2*[except in the case of an application by dependants 
 for compensation] a concise statement of the matters on 
 which agreement has and 3*[of] those on which agreement 
 has not been come to. 
 
 (3) If the applicant is illiterate or for any other reason is 
 unable to furnish the required information in writing, the application 
 shall, if the applicant so desires, be prepared under the direction of 
 the Commissioner. 
 
 
 22A. 
 
 Power of Commissioner to require further deposit in cases of 
fatalaccident. 
 
 
 4*[22A. Power of Commissioner to require further deposit in cases 
 of fatal accident.-(1) Where any sum has been deposited by an employer 
 as compensation payable in respect of a workman whose injury has 
 resulted in death, and in the opinion of the Commissioner such sum is 
 insufficient, the Commissioner may, by notice in writing stating his 
 reasons, call upon the employer to show cause why he should not make a 
 further deposit within such time as may be stated in the notice. 
 
 (2) If the employer fails to show cause to the satisfaction of 
 the Commissioner, the Commissioner may make an award determining the 
 total amount payable, and requiring the employer to deposit the 
 deficiency.] 
 
 
 23. 
 
 Powers and procedure of Commissioners. 
 
 
 23. Powers and procedure of Commissioners.- The Commissioner shall 
 have all the powers of a Civil Court under the Code of Civil 
 Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), for the purpose of taking evidence on 
 oath (which such Commissioner is hereby empowered 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. Subs. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 15, for "where any such question has 
 arisen, the application". 
 2. Ins. by s. 15, ibid. 
 3. Subs. by Act 37 of 1925, s. 2 and Sch. I, for "on". 
 4. Ins. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 16. 
 
 38 

 
23
 
 to impose) and of enforcing the attendance of witnesses and compelling 
 the production of documents and material objects, 1*[and the 
 Commissioner shall be deemed to be a Civil Court for all the purposes 
 of section 195 and of Chapter XXXV of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
 1898 (5 of 1898)]. 
 
 
 24. 
 
 Appearance of parties. 
 
 
 2*[24. Appearance of parties.- Any appearance, application or act 
 required to be made or done by any person before or to a Commissioner 
 (other than an appearance of a party which is required for the purpose 
 of his examination as a witness) may be made or done on behalf of such 
 person by a legal practitioner or by an official of an Insurance 
 Company or a registered Trade Union or by an Inspector appointed under 
 sub-section (1) of section 8 of the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948) 
 or under sub-section (1) of section 5 of the Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 
 1952), or by any other officer specified by the State Government in 
 this behalf, authorised in writing by such person, or, with the 
 permission of the Commissioner, by any other person so authorised.] 3* 
 
 
 25. 
 
 Method of recording evidence. 
 
 
 25. Method of recording evidence.- The Commissioner shall make a 
 brief memorandum of the substance of the evidence of every witness as 
 the examination of the witness proceeds, and such memorandum shall be 
 written and signed by the Commissioner with his own hand and shall 
 form part of the record: 
 
 Provided that, if the Commissioner is prevented from making such 
 memorandum, he shall record the reason of his inability to do so and 
 shall cause such memorandum to be made in writing from his dictation 
 and shall sign the same, and such memorandum shall form part of the 
 record: 
 
 Provided further that the evidence of any medical witness shall 
 be taken down as nearly as may be word for word. 
 
 
 26. 
 
 Costs. 
 
 
 26. Costs.- All costs, incidental to any proceedings before a 
 Commissioner, shall, subject to rules made under this Act, be in the 
 discretion of the Commissioner. 
 
 
 27. 
 
 Power to submit cases. 
 
 
 27. Power to submit cases.- A Commissioner may, if he thinks fit, 
 submit any question of law for the decision of the High Court and, if 
 he does so, shall decide the question in conformity with such 
 decision. 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. Ins. by Act 5 of 1929, s. 5. 
 2. Subs. by Act 8 of 1959, s. 14, for the former section (w.e.f. 1- 
 6-1959). 
 3. In the application of the Act to Bengal, new ss. 24A and 24B have 
 been ins here by Ben. Act 6 of 1942, s. 4. 
 

 
24
 39 
 
 
 28. 
 
 Registration of agreements. 
 
 
 28. Registration of agreements.- (1) Where the amount of any lump 
 sum payable as compensation has been settled by agreement, whether by 
 way of redemption of a half-monthly payment or otherwise, or where any 
 compensation has been so settled as being payable 1*[to a woman or a 
 person under a legal disability] 2*** a memorandum thereof shall be 
 sent by the employer to the Commissioner, who shall, on being satisf- 
 ied as to its genuineness, record the memorandum in a register 
 in the prescribed manner: 
 
 Provided that-- 
 
 (a) no such memorandum shall be recorded before seven days 
 after communication by the Commissioner of notice to 
 the parties concerned; 
 
 3* * * * * 
 
 (c) the Commissioner may at any time rectify the register; 
 
 (d) where it appears to the Commissioner that an agreement 
 as to the payment of a lump sum whether by way of 
 redemption of a half-monthly payment or otherwise, or 
 an agreement as to the amount of compensation payable 
 1*[to a woman or a person under a legal disability] 
 4*** ought not to be registered by reason of the inade- 
 quacy of the sum or amount, or by reason of the 
 agreem agreement having been obtained by fraud or 
 undue influence or other improper means, he may refuse 
 to record the memorandum of the agreement 5*[and may 
 make such order] including an order as to any sum 
 already paid under the agreement, as he thinks just in 
 the circumstances. 
 
 (2) An agreement for the payment of compensation which has been 
 registered under sub-section (1) shall be enforceable under this Act 
 notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Contract Act, 1872 
 (9 of 1872), or in any other law for the time being in force. 
 
 
 29. 
 
 Effect of failure to register agreement. 
 
 
 29. Effect of failure to register agreement.- Where a memorandum 
 of any agreement the registration of which is required by section 28, 
 is not sent to the Commissioner as required by that section, the 
 employer shall be liable to pay the full amount of compensation which 
 he is liable to pay under the provisions of this Act, and 
 notwithstanding anything contained in 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. Subs. by Act 5 of 1929, s. 6, for certain words. 
 2. The words "or to a dependant" rep. by Act 7 of 1924, s. 3 and 
 Sch. II. 
 3. Cl. (b) rep. by Act 5 of 1929, s. 6. 
 4. The words "or to any dependant" rep. by Act 7 of 1924, s. 3 and 
 Sch. II. 
 5. Subs. by Act 7 of 1924, s. 2 and Sch. I, for "or may make such 
 order". 
 
 40 
 
 the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 4, shall not, unless the 
 Commissioner otherwise directs, be entitled to deduct more than half 
 of any amount paid to the workmen by way of compensation whether under 

 
25
 the agreement or otherwise. 
 
 
 30. 
 
 Appeals. 
 
 
 30. Appeals.- (1) An appeal shall lie to the High Court from the 
 following orders of a Commissioner, namely:-- 
 
 (a) an order awarding as compensation a lump sum whether by 
 way of redemption of a half-monthly payment or 
 otherwise or disallowing a claim in full or in part for 
 a lump sum; 
 
 1*[(aa) an order awarding interest or penalty under section 
 4A;] 
 
 (b) an order refusing to allow redemption of a half-monthly 
 payment; 
 
 (c) an order providing for the distribution of compensation 
 among the dependants of a deceased workman, or 
 disallowing any claim of a person alleging himself to 
 be such dependant; 
 
 (d) an order allowing or disallowing any claim for the 
 amount of an indemnity under the provisions of sub- 
 section (2) of section 12; or 
 
 (e) an order refusing to register a memorandum of agreement 
 or registering the same or providing for the 
 registration of the same subject to conditions: 
 
 Provided that no appeal shall lie against any order unless a 
 substantial question of law is involved in the appeal and, in the case 
 of an order other than an order such as is referred to in clause (b), 
 unless the amount in dispute in the appeal is not less than three 
 hundred rupees: 
 
 Provided, further, that no appeal shall lie in any case in which 
 the parties have agreed to abide by the decision of the Commissioner, 
 or in which the order of the Commissioner gives effect to an agreement 
 come to by the parties: 
 
 2*[Provided further that no appeal by an employer under clause 
 (a) shall lie unless the memorandum of appeal is accompanied by a 
 certificate by the Commissioner to the effect that the appellant has 
 deposited with him the amount payable under the order appealed 
 against.] 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. Ins. by Act 8 of 1959, s. 15 (w.e.f. 1-6-1959). 
 2. Ins. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 17. 
 
 41 
 
 (2) The period of limitation for an appeal under this section 
 shall be sixty days. 
 
 (3) The provisions of section 5 of the Indian Limitation Act, 
 1908 (9 of 1908), shall be applicable to appeals under this section. 
 
 
 30A. 
 
 Withholding of certain payments pending decision of appeal. 
 
 
 1*[30A. Withholding of certain payments pending decision of 
 appeal.-Where an employer makes an appeal under clause (a) of sub- 
 section (1) of section 30, the Commissioner may, and if so directed by 
 the High Court shall, pending the decision of the appeal, withhold 

 
26
 payment of any sum in deposit with him.] 
 
 
 31. 
 
 Recovery. 
 
 
 31. Recovery.- The Commissioner may recover as an arrear of land- 
 revenue any amount payable by any person under this Act, whether under 
 an agreement for the payment of compensation or otherwise, and the 
 Commissioner shall be deemed to be a public officer within the meaning 
 of section 5 of the Revenue Recovery Act, 1890 (1 of 1890). 2* 
 
 
 CHAP 
 
 RULES 
 
 
 CHAPTER IV 
 
 RULES 
 
 
 32. 
 
 Power of the State Government to make rules. 
 
 
 32. Power of the State Government to make rules.-(1) The 3*[State 
 Government] may make rules4* to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
 
 (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
 foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the 
 following matters, namely:-- 
 
 (a) for prescribing the intervals at which and the 
 conditions subject to which an application for review 
 may be made under section 6 when not accompanied by a 
 medical certificate; 
 
 (b) for prescribing the intervals at which and the 
 conditions subject to which a workman may be required 
 to submit himself for medical examination under sub- 
 section (1) of section 11; 
 
 (c) for prescribing the procedure to be followed by 
 Commissioners in the disposal of cases under this Act 
 and by the parties in such cases; 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. Ins. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 18. 
 2. In the application of the Act to Bengal, a new s. 31A has been 
 ins. here by the Bengal Touts Act, 1942 (Ben. 5 of 1942), s. 12. 
 3. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for "G. G. in C.". 
 4. For the Workmen's Compensation Rules, 1924, see Gazette of India, 
 1924, Pt. I, p. 586. 
 
 42 
 
 (d) for regulating the transfer of matters and cases from 
 one Commissioner to another and the transfer of money 
 in such cases; 
 
 (e) for prescribing the manner in which money in the hands 
 of a Commissioner may be invested for the benefit of 
 dependants of a deceased workman and for the transfer 
 of money so invested from one Commissioner to another; 
 
 (f) for the representation in proceedings before 
 Commissioners of parties who are minors or are unable 
 to make an appearance;1* 
 

 
27
 (g) for prescribing the form and manner in which memoranda 
 of agreements shall be presented and registered; 
 
 (h) for the withholding by Commissioners, whether in whole 
 or in part of half-monthly payments pending decision on 
 applications for review of the same; 2*** 
 
 2* * * * * 
 
 2*[(i) for regulating the scales of costs which may be 
 allowed in proceedings under this Act; 
 
 (j) for prescribing and determining the amount of the fees 
 payable in respect of any proceedings before a 
 Commissioner under this Act; 
 
 (k) for the maintenance by Commissioners of registers and 
 records of proceedings before them; 
 
 (l) for prescribing the classes of employers who shall 
 maintain notice-books under sub-section (3) of section 
 10, and the form of such notice-books; 
 
 (m) for prescribing the form of statement to be submitted by 
 employers under section 10A; 3*** 
 
 (n) for prescribing the cases in which the report referred 
 to in section 10B may be sent to an authority other 
 than the Commissioner;] 
 
 4*[(o) for prescribing abstracts of this Act and requiring 
 the employers to display notices containing such 
 abstracts; 
 
 (p) for prescribing the manner in which diseases specified 
 as occupational diseases may be diagnosed; 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. In the application of the Act of Bengal, new clauses (ff), (ff1) 
 and (ff2) have been ins. here by Ben. Act 6 of 1942, s. 5. 
 2. The word "and" at the end of cl. (h) and the original cl. (i) 
 rep., and the new cls. (i) to (n), which were the same as cls. 
 (a) to (f) of s. 33, ins. by the A. O. 1937. 
 3. The word "and" omitted by Act 58 of 1960, s. 3 and Sch. II. 
 4. Ins. by Act 8 of 1959, s. 16 (w.e.f. 1-6-1959). 
 
 43 
 
 (q) for prescribing the manner in which diseases may be 
 certified for any of the purposes of this Act; 
 
 (r) for prescribing the manner in which, and the standards 
 by which, incapacity may be assessed.] 
 
 1*[(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon 
 as may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.] 
 
 
 33. 
 
 [Repealed.] 
 
 
 33. [Power of Local Government to make rules.] Rep. by the A. O. 
 1937. 
 
 
 34. 
 
 Publication of rules. 
 
 
 34. Publication of rules.- (1) The power to make rules conferred 
 by 2*[section 32] shall be subject to the condition of the rules being 

 
28
 made after previous publication. 
 
 (2) The date to be specified in accordance with clause (3) of 
 section 23 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), as that 
 after which a draft of rules proposed to be made under section 32 3*** 
 will be taken into consideration, shall not be less than three months 
 from the date on which the draft of the proposed rules was published 
 for general information. 
 
 (3) Rules so made shall be published in 4*** the Official Gazette 
 5*** and, on such publication, shall have effect as if enacted in this 
 Act. 
 
 
 35. 
 
 Rules to give effect to arrangements with other countries for 
thetransfer 
 of money paid as compensation. 
 
 
 6*[35. Rules to give effect to arrangements with other countries 
 for the transfer of money paid as compensation.- 7*[(1)] The Central 
 Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
 for the transfer 8*** 9*[to any foreign country] of money 
10*[deposited 
 with] a Commissioner under this Act 11*[which has been awarded to 
or 
 may be due to], any person residing or about to reside in 9*[such 
 foreign country] and for 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. Ins. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and Sch. (w.e.f. 15-5-1986). 
 2. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for "sections 32 and 33". 
 3. The words and figures "or section 33" rep., ibid. 
 4. The words "the Gazette of India or" rep., ibid. 
 5. The words "as the case may be" rep., ibid. 
 6. Ins. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 20. 
 7. The original s. 35 renumbered as sub-section (1) of that section 
 by Act 7 of 1937, s. 2. 
 8. The words "to any Part B State or" ins. by the A. O. 1948, 
 omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch. 
 9. Subs. by Act 22 of 1984, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1-7-1984). 
 10. Subs. by Act 7 of 1937, s. 2, for "paid to". 
 11. Subs. by 2, ibid., for "for the benefit of". 
 
 44 
 
 the receipt 1*[distribution] and administration in 2*[any State] of 
 any money 3*[deposited] under the law relating to workmen's 
 compensation 4*** 5*[in any foreign country],6*[which has been awarded 
 to, or may be due to] any person residing or about to reside in 2*[any 
 State]:] 
 
 1*[Provided that no sum deposited under this Act in respect of 
 fatal accidents shall be so transferred without the consent of the 
 employer concerned until the Commissioner receiving the sum has passed 
 orders determining its distribution and apportionment under the 
 provisions of sub-sections (4) and (5) of section 8. 
 
 (2) Where money deposited with a Commissioner has been so 
 transferred in accordance with the rules made under this section, the 
 provisions elsewhere contained in this Act regarding distribution by 
 the Commissioner of compensation deposited with him shall cease to 
 apply in respect of any such money.] 
 
 
 36. 
 
 Rules made by Central Government to be laid before Parliament. 
 
 
 7*[36. Rules made by Central Government to be laid before 
 Parliament.- Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government 

 
29
 shall be laid as soon as may be after if is made before each House of 
 Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days 
 which may be comprised in one session or in 8*[two or more successive 
 sessions, and if, before the expiry of that the session immediately 
 following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid], both 
 Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses 
 agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have 
 effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
 be; so however that any such modification or annulment shall be 
 without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
 that rule.] 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. Ins. by Act 7 of 1937, s. 2. 
 2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., for "a Part A State or 
 Part C State". 
 3. Subs. by Act 7 of 1937, s. 2, for "awarded". 
 4. Of the words "in any Part B State or" ins. by the A. O. 1950, 
 first five words were omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Sch., 
 and the word "or" was omitted by Act 36 of 1957, s. 3 and Sch. 
 II. 
 5. Subs. by act 22 of 1984, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1-7-1984). 
 6. Subs. by Act 7 of 1937, s. 2, for "and applicable for the benefit 
 of". 
 7. Ins. by Act 64 of 1962, s. 8 (w.e.f. 1-2-1976). 
 8. Subs. by Act 65 of 1976, s. 3, for certain words (w.e.f. 21-5- 
 1976). 
 
 45 
 
 
 SCHE 
 
 See sections 2(1) and (4) 
 
 
 1*[SCHEDULE I 
 
 [See sections 2(1) and (4)] 
 
 2*[PART I 
 
 LIST OF INJURIES DEEMED TO RESULT IN PERMANENT TOTAL DISABLEMENT] 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 Serial Description of injury Percentage 
 No. of loss 
 of earning 
 capacity 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
 1 Loss of both hands or amputation at higher sites 100 
 
 2 Loss of a hand and a foot 100 
 
 3 Double amputation through leg or thigh, or amputation 
 through leg or thigh on one side and loss of other foot 100 
 
 4 Loss of sight to such an extent as to render the claimant 
 unable to perform any work for which eye sight is essential 100 
 
 5 Very severe facial disfigurement 100 
 
 6 Absolute deafness 100 
 
 3*[PART II 
 
 LIST OF INJURIES DEEMED TO RESULT IN PERMANENT PARTIAL DISABLEMENT] 
 
 Amputation cases-upper limbs (either arm) 
 
 4*[1] Amputation through shoulder joint 90 
 
 4*[2] Amputation below shoulder with stump less than 8" from 80 
 tip of acromion 

 
30
 
 4*[3] Amputation from 8" from tip of acromion to less than 70 
 4.5" below tip of olecranon 
 
 4*[4] Loss of a hand or of the thumb and four fingers of one 60 
 hand or amputation from 4.5" below tip of olecranon 
 
 4*[5] Loss of thumb 30 
 
 4*[6] Loss of thumb and its metacarpal bone 40 
 
 4*[7] Loss of four fingers of one hand 50 
 
 4*[8] Loss of three fingers of one hand 30 
 
 4*[9] Loss of two fingers of one hand 20 
 
 4*[10] Loss of terminal phalanx of thumb 20 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. Subs. by Act 8 of 1959, s. 17, for the former Sch. I (w.e.f. 1-6- 
 1959). 
 2. Subs. by Act 64 of 1962, s. 9, for the former heading (w.e.f. 1- 
 2-1963). 
 3. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-2-1963). 
 4. Serial Nos. 7 to 54 renumbered as serial Nos. 1 to 48 
 respectively by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-2-1963). 
 
 46 
 
 (Schedule I.) 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 Serial Description of injury Percentage 
 No. of loss 
 of earning 
 capacity 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 Amputation cases-lower limbs 
 
 1*[11] Amputation of both feet resulting in end-bearing stumps 90 
 
 1*[12] Amputation through both feet proximal to the metatarso- 
 phalangeal joint 80 
 
 1*[13] Loss of all toes of both feet through the metatarso- 40 
 phalangeal joint 
 
 1*[14] Loss of all toes of both feet proximal to the proximal 30 
 inter-phalangeal joint 
 
 1*[15] Loss of all toes of both feet distal to the proximal 20 
 inter-phalangeal joint 
 
 1*[16] Amputation at hip 90 
 
 1*[17] Amputation below hip with stump not exceeding 5" in 80 
 length measured from tip of great trenchanter 
 
 1*[18] Amputation below hip with stump exceeding 5" in length 70 
 measured from tip of great trenchanter but not beyond 
 middle thigh 
 
 1*[19] Amputation below middle thigh to 3.5" below knee 60 
 
 1*[20] Amputation below knee with stump exceeding 3.5" but 50 
 not exceeding 5" 
 
 1*[21] Amputation below knee with stump exceeding 5" 40 
 
 1*[22] Amputation of one foot resulting in end-bearing 30 
 
 1*[23] Amputation through one foot proximal to the metatarso- 
 phalangeal joint 30 
 

 
31
 1*[24] Loss of all toes of one foot through the metatarso- 20 
 phalangeal joint 
 
 Other injuries 
 
 1*[25] Loss of one eye, without complications, the other 40 
 being normal 
 
 1*[26] Loss of vision of one eye, without complications or 30 
 disfigure- ment of eye-ball, the other being normal 
 
 Loss of-- 
 
 A.--Fingers of right or left hand 
 
 Index finger 
 
 1*[27] Whole 14 
 
 1*[28] Two phalanges 11 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. Serial Nos. 7 to 54 renumbered as serial Nos. 1 to 48 
 respectively by Act 64 of 1962, s. 9 (w.e.f. 1-2-1963). 
 
 47 
 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 Serial Description of injury Percentage 
 No. of loss 
 of earning 
 capacity 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
 1*[29] One phalanx 9 
 
 1*[30] Guillotine amputation of tip without loss of bone 5 
 
 Middle finger 
 
 1*[31] Whole 12 
 
 1*[32] Two phalanges 9 
 
 1*[33] One phalanx 7 
 
 1*[34] Guillotine amputation of tip without loss of bone 4 
 
 Ring or little finger 
 
 1*[35] Whole 7 
 
 1*[36] Two phalanges 6 
 
 1*[37] One phalanx 5 
 
 1*[38] Guillotine amputation of tip without loss of bone 2 
 
 B.--Toes of right or left foot 
 
 Great toe 
 
 1*[39] Through metatarso-phalangeal joint 14 
 
 1*[40] Part, with some loss of bone 3 
 
 Any other toe 
 
 1*[41] Through metatarso-phalangeal joint 3 
 
 1*[42] Part, with some loss of bone 1 
 
 Two toes of one foot, excluding great toe 
 

 
32
 1*[43] Through metatarso-phalangeal joint 5 
 
 1*[44] Part, with some loss of bone 2 
 
 Three toes of one foot, excluding great toe 
 
 1*[45] Through metatarso-phalangeal joint 6 
 
 1*[46] Part, with some loss of bone 3 
 
 Four toes of one foot, excluding great toe 
 
 1*[47] Through metatarso-phalangeal joint 9 
 
 1*[48] Part, with some loss of bone 3.] 
 
 2*[NOTE.--Complete and permanent loss of the use of any limb or 
 member referred to in this Schedule shall be deemed to be the 
 equivalent of the loss of that limb or member.] 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. Serial Nos. 7 to 54 renumbered as serial Nos. 1 to 48 
 respectively by Act 64 of 1962, s. 9 (w.e.f. 1-2-1963). 
 2. Ins. by Act 58 of 1960, s. 3 and Sch. II. 
 
 48 
 
 
 SCHE 
 
 See section 2 (1) (n) 
 
 
 SCHEDULE II 
 
 [See section 2 (1) (n)] 
 
 LIST OF PERSONS WHO, SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF SECTION 2 (1) (n), 
 ARE INCLUDED IN THE DEFINITION OF WORKMEN 
 
 The following persons are workmen within the meaning of section 2 
 (1) (n) and subject to the provisions of that section, that is to say, 
 any person who is-- 
 
 1*[2*[(i) employed, otherwise than in a clerical capacity or 
 on a railway, in connection with the operation or 
 maintenance of a lift or a vehicle propelled by steam 
 or other mechanical power or by electricity or in 
 connection with the loading or unloading of any such 
 vehicle; or 
 
 (ii) employed, otherwise than in a clerical capacity, in any 
 premises wherein or within the precincts whereof a 
 manufacturing process as defined in clause (k) of 
 section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948), is 
 being carried on, or in any kind of work whatsoever 
 incidental to or connected with any such manufacturing 
 process or with the article made 3*[whether or not 
 employment in any such work is within such premises or 
 precincts], and steam, water or other mechanical power 
 or electrical power is used; or 
 
 (iii) employed for the purpose of making, altering, 
 repairing, ornamenting, finishing or otherwise adapting 
 for use, transport or sale any article or part of an 
 article in any premises wherein or within the precincts 
 where of twenty or more persons are so employed; 4*** 
 
 3*[Explanation.--For the purposes of this clause, persons 
 employed outside such premises or precincts but in any 
 work incidental to, or connected with, the work 
 relating to making, altering, repairing, ornamenting, 
 finishing or otherwise adapting for use, transport or 
 sale any article or part of an article shall be deemed 

 
33
 to be employed within such premises or precincts; or] 
 --------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. Subs. by Act 15 of 1933, s. 21, for cls. (i) to (xiii). 
 2. Subs. by Act 8 of 1959, s. 18, for cls. (i) to (ix) (w.e.f. 1-6- 
 1959). 
 3. Ins. by Act 64 of 1962, s. 10 (w.e.f. 1-2-1963). 
 4. The word "or" omitted by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-2-1963). 
 
 48A 
 
 (iv) employed in the manufacture or handling of explosives 
 in connection with the employer's trade or business; or 
 
 (v) employed, in any mine as defined in clause (j) of 
 section 2 of the Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952),in 
 any mining operation or in any kind of work, other 
 than clerical work, incidental to or connected with 
 any mining operation or with the mineral obtained, or 
 in any kind of work whatsoever below ground; or 
 
 (vi) employed as the master or as a seaman of-- 
 
 (a) any ship which is propelled wholly or in part 
 by steam or other mechanical power or by electricity or 
 which is towed or intended to be towed by a ship so 
 propelled; or 
 
 (b) any ship not included in sub-clause (a), of 
 twenty-five tons net tonnage or over; or 
 
 (c) any sea-going ship not included in sub-clause 
 (a) or sub-clause (b) provided with sufficient area for 
 navigation under sails alone; or 
 
 (vii) employed for the purpose of-- 
 
 (a) loading, unloading, fuelling, constructing, 
 repairing, demolishing, cleaning or painting any ship 
 of which he is not the master or a member of the crew, 
 or handling or transport within the limits of any port 
 subject to the Indian Ports Act, 1908 (15 of 1908), of 
 goods which have been discharged from or are to be 
 loaded into any vessel; or 
 
 (b) warping a ship through the lock; or 
 
 (c) mooring and unmooring ships at harbour wall 
 berths or in pier; or 
 
 (d) removing or replacing dry dock caisoons when 
 vessels are entering or leaving dry docks; or 
 
 (e) the docking or undocking of any vessel during 
 an emergency; or 
 
 (f) preparing splicing coir springs and check 
 wires, painting depth marks on lock-sides, removing or 
 replacing fenders whenever necessary, landing of 
 gangways, maintaining life-buoys up to standard or any 
 other maintenance work of a like nature; or 
 
 48B 
 
 (g) any work on jolly-boats for bringing a ship's 
 line to the wharf; or 
 
 (viii) employed in the construction, maintenance, repair or 
 demolition of-- 
 
 (a) any building which is designed to be or is or 
 has been more than one storey in height above the 
 ground or twelve feet or more from the ground level to 
 the apex of the roof; or 

 
34
 
 (b) any dam or embankment which is twelve feet or 
 more in height from its lowest to its highest point; or 
 
 (c) any road, bridge, tunnel or canal; or 
 
 (d) any wharf, quay, sea-wall or other marine work 
 including any moorings of ships; or 
 
 (ix) employed in setting up, maintaining, repairing or 
 taking down any telegraph or telephone line or post or 
 any overhead electric line or cable or post or standard 
 or fittings and fixtures for the same; or] 
 
 (x) employed, otherwise than in a clerical capacity, in the 
 construction, working, repair or demolition of any 
 aerial ropeway, canal, pipe-line, or sewer; or 
 
 (xi) employed in the service of any fire brigade; or 
 
 (xii) employed upon a railway as defined in clause (4) of 
 section 3, and sub-section (1) of section 148 of the 
 Indian Railways Act, 1890 (9 of 1890), either directly 
 or through a sub-contractor, by a person fulfilling a 
 contract with the railway administration; or 
 
 (xiii) employed as an inspector, mail guard, sorter or van 
 peon in the Railway Mail Service 1*[or as a 
 telegraphist or as a postal or railway signaller], or 
 employed in any occupation ordinarily involving outdoor 
 work in the Indian Posts and Telegraphs Department; or 
 
 (xiv) employed, otherwise than in a clerical capacity, in 
 connection with operations for winning natural 
 petroleum or natural gas; or 
 
 (xv) employed in any occupation involving blasting 
 operations; or 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. Ins. by Act 8 of 1959, s. 18 (w.e.f. 1-6-1959). 
 
 48C 
 
 (xvi) employed in the making of any excavation in which on 
 any one day of the preceding twelve months more than 
 1*[twenty-five] persons have been employed or 
 explosives have been used, or whose depth from its 
 highest to its lowest point exceeds 2*[twelve] feet; or 
 
 (xvii) employed in the operation of any ferry boat capable 
 of carrying more than ten persons; or 
 
 (xviii) employed, otherwise than in a clerical capacity, on 
 any estate which is maintained for the purpose of 
 growing 3*[cardamom], cinchona, coffee, rubber or tea, 
 and on which on any one day in the preceding twelve 
 months twenty-five or more persons have been so 
 employed; or 
 
 (xix) employed, otherwise than in a clerical capacity, in 
 the generating, transforming or supplying of electrical 
 energy or in the generating or supplying of gas; or 
 
 (xx) employed in a lighthouse as defined in clause (d) of 
 section 2 of the Indian Lighthouse Act, 1927 (17 of 
 1927); or 
 
 (xxi) employed in producing cinematograph pictures intended 
 for public exhibition or in exhibiting such pictures; 
 or 
 
 (xxii) employed in the training, keeping or working of 
 elephants or wild animals; or 

 
35
 
 4*[(xxiii) employed in the tapping of palm-trees or the 
 felling or logging of trees, or the transport of timber 
 by inland waters, or the control or extinguishing of 
 forest fires; or 
 
 (xxiv) employed in operations for the catching or hunting of 
 elephants or other wild animals; or] 
 
 5[(xxv)] employed as a diver; 4*[or 
 
 (xxvi) employed in the handling or transport of goods in, or 
 within the precincts of,-- 
 
 (a) any warehouse or other place in which goods 
 are stored, and in which on any one day of the 
 preceding twelve months ten or more persons have been 
 so employed, or 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. Subs. by Act 8 of 1959, s. 18, for "fifty" (w.e.f. 1-6-1959). 
 2. Subs. by s. 18, ibid., for "twenty" (w.e.f. 1-6-1959). 
 3. Ins. by Act 64 of 1962, s. 10 (w.e.f. 1-2-1963). 
 4. Ins. by Act 9 of 1938, s. 11. 
 5. Original cl. (xxiii) renumbered (xxv) by s. 11, ibid. 
 
 48D-48F 
 
 (b) any market in which on any one day of the 
 preceding twelve months 1*[fifty] or more persons have 
 been so employed; or 
 
 (xxvii) employed in any occupation involving the handling 
 and manipulation of radium or X-rays apparatus, or 
 contact with radio-active substances;] 2*[or] 
 
 2*[(xxviii) employed in or in connection with the 
 construction, erection, dismantling, operation or 
 maintenance of an aircraft as defined in section 2 of 
 the Indian Aircraft Act, 1934 (22 of 1934); or 
 
 (xxix) employed in farming by tractors or other contrivances 
 driven by steam or other mechanical power or by 
 electricity; or 
 
 (xxx) employed, otherwise than in a clerical capacity, in 
 the construction, working, repair or maintenance of a 
 tubewell ; or 
 
 (xxxi) employed in the maintenance, repair or renewal of 
 electric fittings in any building ; or 
 
 (xxxii) employed in a circus.] 
 
 Explanation.--In this Schedule, "the preceding twelve months" 
 relates in any particular case to the twelve months ending with the 
 day on which the accident in such case occurred.] 
 
 
 SCHE 
 
 See section 3 
 
 
 3*[SCHEDULE III 
 
 (See section 3) 
 
 LIST OF OCCUPATIONAL DISEASES 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 S. No. Occupational disease Employment 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 (1) (2) (3) 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 

 
36
 PART A 
 
 1. Infectious and parasitic dis- (a) All work involving exposure 
 eases contracted in an occu- to health or laboratory work; 
 pation where there is a parti- 
 cular risk of contamination. (b) All work involving exposure 
 to veterinary work; 
 
 (c) Work relating to handling 
 animals, animal carcasses, 
 part of such carcasses, or 
 merchandise which may have 
 been contaminated by animals 
 or animal carcasses; 
 
 (d) Other work carrying a parti- 
 cular risk of contamination. 
 
 2. Diseases caused by work in All work involving exposure to 
 compressed air. the risk concerned. 
 
 3. Diseases caused by lead or its All work involving exposure to 
 toxic compounds. the risk concerned. 
 
 4. Poisoning by nitrous fumes. All work involving exposure to 
 the risk concerned. 
 
 5. Poisoning by organo phospho- All work involving exposure to 
 rus compounds. the risk concerned. 
 
 PART B 
 
 
 1. Diseases caused by phosphorus All work involving exposure to 
 or its toxic compounds. the risk concerned. 
 
 2. Diseases caused by mercury or All work involving exposure to 
 its toxic compounds. the risk concerned. 
 
 3. Diseases caused by benzene or All work involving exposure to 
 its toxic homologues. the risk concerned. 
 
 4. Diseases caused by nitro and All work involving exposure to 
 amido toxic derivatives of the risk concerned. 
 benzene or its homologues. 
 
 5. Diseases caused by chromium All work involving exposure to 
 or its toxic compounds. the risk concerned. 
 
 6. Diseases caused by arsenic or All work involving exposure to 
 its toxic compounds. the risk concerned. 
 
 7. Diseases caused by radioactive All work involving exposure to 
 substances and ionising radia- the action of radioactive sub- 
 tions. stances or ionising 
 radiations. 
 
 8. Primary epitheliomatous can- All work involving exposure to 
 cer of the skin caused by tar, the risk concerned. 
 pitch, bitumen, mineral oil, 
 anthracene, or the compounds, 
 products or residues of these 
 substances. 
 
 9. Diseases caused by the toxic All work involving exposure to 
 halogen derivatives of hydro- the risk concerned. 
 carbons (of the aliphatic 
 andaromatic series). 
 
 10. Diseases caused by carbon All work involving exposure to 
 disulphide. the risk concerned. 
 
 11. Occupational cataract due to All work involving exposure to 

 
37
 infra-red radiations. the risk concerned. 
 
 12. Diseases caused by manganese All work involving exposure to 
 or its toxic compounds. the risk concerned. 
 
 13. Skin diseases caused by physi- All work involving exposure to 
 cal, chemical or biological the risk concerned. 
 agents not included in other 
 items. 
 
 14. Hearing impairment caused All work involving exposure to 
 by noise. the risk concerned. 
 
 15. Poisoning by dinitrophenol or All work involving exposure to 
 a homologue or by substitut- the risk concerned. 
 ed dinitrophenol or by the 
 salts of such substances. 
 
 16. Diseases caused by beryllium All work involving exposure to 
 or its toxic compounds. the risk concerned. 
 
 17. Diseases caused by cadmium All work involving exposure to 
 or its toxic compounds. the risk concerned. 
 
 18. Occupational asthma caused All work involving exposure to 
 by recognised sensitising the risk concerned. 
 agents inherent to the work 
 process. 
 
 19. Diseases caused by fluorine or All work involving exposure to 
 its toxic compounds. the risk concerned. 
 
 20. Diseases caused by nitrogly- All work involving exposure to 
 cerine or other nitroacid the risk concerned. 
 esters. 
 
 21. Diseases caused by alcohols All work involving exposure to 
 and ketones. the risk concerned. 
 
 22. Diseases caused by asphy- All work involving exposure to 
 xiants: carbon monoxide, and the risk concerned. 
 its toxic derivatives, hydrogen 
 sulfide. 
 
 23. Lung cancer and mesothelio- All work involving exposure to 
 mas caused by asbestos. the risk concerned. 
 
 24. Primary neoplasm of the epi- All work involving exposure to 
 thelial lining of the urinary the risk concerned. 
 bladder or the kidney or the 
 ureter. 
 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. Subs. by Act 8 of 1959, s. 18, "one hundred" (w. e. f. 1-6-1959). 
 2. Ins. by s. 18. ibid. (w.e.f.1-6-1959). 
 3. Subs. by Act 22 of 1994, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1-7-1994). 
 
 
 PART C 
 
 1. Pneumoconioses caused by All work involving exposure to 
 sclerogenic mineral dust (sili- the risk concerned. 
 cosis, anthraoosilicosis, as- 
 bestosis) and silico-tubercu- 
 losis provided that silicosis is 
 an essential factor in causing 
 the resultant incapacity or 
 death. 
 
 2. Bagassosis. All work involving exposure to 
 the risk concerned. 
 
 3. Bronchopulmonary diseases All work involving exposure to 

 
38
 caused by cotton, flax hemp the risk concerned. 
 and sisal dust (Byssinosis). 
 
 4. Extrinsic allergic alveelitis All work involving exposure to 
 caused by the inhalation of the risk concerned. 
 organic dusts. 
 
 5. Bronchopulmonary diseases All work involving exposure to 
 caused by hard metals. the risk concerned." 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1. Subs. by Act 8 of 1959, s. 18, "one hundred" (w.e.f. 1-6-1959). 
 2. Ins. by s. 18. ibid. (w.e.f.1-6-1959). 
 3. Subs. by Act 22 of 1994, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1-7-1994). 
 
 48G 
 
 
 SCHE 
 
 See section 4 
 
 
 2*[SCHEDULE IV 
 
 (See section 4) 
 
 Factors for working out lump sum equivalent of compensation 
 amount in case of permanent disablement and death. 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 Completed years of age on the last birthday of the Factors 
 workman immediately preceding the date on which 
 the compensation fell due 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 1 2 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 not more than 16 228.54 
 
 17 227.49 
 
 18 226.38 
 
 19 225.22 
 
 20 224.00 
 
 21 222.71 
 
 22 221.37 
 
 23 219.95 
 
 24 218.47 
 
 25 216.91 
 
 26 215.28 
 
 27 213.57 
 
 28 211.79 
 
 29 209.92 
 
 30 207.98 
 
 31 205.95 
 
 32 203.85 
 
 33 201.66 
 
 34 199.40 
 

 
39
 35 197.06 
 
 36 294.64 
 
 37 192.14 
 
 38 189.56 
 
 39 186.90 
 
 40 184.17 
 
 41 181.37 
 
 42 178.49 
 
 43 175.54 
 
 44 172.52 
 
 45 169.44 
 
 46 166.29 
 
 47 163.07 
 
 48 159.80 
 
 49 156.47 
 
 50 153.09 
 
 51 149.67 
 
 52 146.20 
 
 53 142.68 
 
 54 139.13 
 
 55 135.56 
 
 56 131.95 
 
 57 128.33 
 
 58 124.70 
 
 59 121.05 
 
 60 117.41 
 
 61 113.77 
 
 62 110.14 
 
 63 106.52 
 
 64 102.93 
 
 65 or more 99.37.] 
 ---------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
 1 Subs. by Act 22 of 1984, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1-7-1984). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
40