The Sales Promotion Employees 
(Conditions of Service) Act, 1976 
(No. 11 of 1976) 
CONTENTS 
Section 
 
1. 
Short title, extent, commencement and application 
 
 
2. 
Definitions 
 
 
3. 
Power of Central Government to declare certain industries to be 
 
notified industries 
 
 
4. 
Leave 
 
 
5. 
Issue of appointment letter 
 
 
6. 
Application of certain Acts to sales promotion employees 
 
 
7. 
Maintenance of registers 
 
 
8. 
Inspectors 
 
 
9. 
Penalty 
 
 
10. Offences by companies 
 
 
11. Cognizance of offence 
 
 
11-A. 
Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with this Act 
 
 
12. Power to make rules 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
1
 
 
The Sales Promotion Employees 
(Conditions of Service) Act, 1976 
(No. 11 of 1976) 
[25th January, 1976] 
An Act to regulate certain conditions of service of sales promotion employees in certain 
establishments 
 
Be it enacted by parliament in the Twenty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows: 
 
 
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application.- (1) This Act may be 
called the Sales Promotion Employees (Condition of Service) Act, 1976. 
 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
 
(3) It shall come into force on such date 1as the central government may, by 
notification in the official Gazette, appoint and different date may be appointed for 
different State. 
 
(4) It shall apply in the first instance to every establishment engaged in 
pharmaceutical industry. 
 
(5) The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, apply the 
provision of this Act, with effect from such date as may be specified in the notification, to 
any other establishment engaged in any notified industry. 
 
 
2. Definition.- In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- 
 
 
(a) “establishment” means an establishment engaged in pharmaceutical 
industry or in any notified industry ; 
 
 
(b) “notified industry” means an industry declared as such under section 3 
 
 
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
 
 
2[(d) “sales promotion employee” means any person by whatever name called 
(including an apprentice) employed or engaged in any establishment for hire or reward to 
do any work relating to promotion of sales or business, or both, but does not include any 
such person- 
 
 
(i) who, being employed or engaged in a supervisory capacity, draws wages 
 
exceeding sixteen hundred rupees per menses; or 
 
 
(ii) who is employed or engaged mainly in a managerial or administrative 
 
capacity. 
 
 
1 With effect from 6th May, 1987, vide S.O. 458(E), dated 5th May, 1987, published in 
the Gazette of India, Pt. II. Sec 3 (ii), No. 219, dated 5th May 1987. 
 
2 Subs. by Act 48 of 1986, Sec. 2 (w.e.f. 6th May, 1987). 
 

 
2
 
Explanation. - For the purpose of this clause, the wages per mensem of a person 
shall be deemed to be the amount equal to thirty times his total wages (whether or not 
including, or comprising only of, commission) in respect of the continuous period of this 
service falling within the period of twelve months immediately preceding the date with 
reference to which the calculation is to be made, divided by the number of days 
comprising the period of service;] 
 
(e) all words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the 
Industrial Disputes Act. 1947 (14 of 1947), shall have the meaning respectively assigned 
to them in that Act. 
 
 
3. Power of Central Government to declare certain industries to be 
notified industries.- The Central Government may, having regard to the nature of any 
industry (not being pharmaceutical industry), the number of employees employed in such 
industry to do any work relating to promotion of sales or business or both, the conditions 
of service of such employees and such other factors which, in the opinion of the Central 
Government, are relevant, declare such industry to be a notified industry for the purposes 
of this Act. 
 
4. 
Leave.-3[(1) In addition to such holidays, casual leave or other kinds of leave as 
may be prescribed, every sales promotion employee 4[* * *] shall be granted, if so 
requested for- 
 
(a) earned leave on full wages for not less than one-eleventh of the period spent 
on duty; 
 
 
(b) leave on medical certificate on one-half of the wages for not less than oneeighteenth of the period service. 
 
5(2)The maximum limit up to which a sales promotion employee may accumulate 
earned leave shall be such as may be prescribed. 
 
(3) The limit up to which the earned leave may be availed of at a time by a sales 
promotion employee and the reasons for which such limit may be exceeded shall be such 
as may be prescribed. 
 
(4) A sales promotion employee shall,- 
 
 
(a) when he voluntarily relinquishes his post or retires from service, or 
 
 
(b) when his services are terminated for any reason whatsoever (not being 
 
termination as punishment). 
be entitled to cash compensation, subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be 
prescribed (including conditions by way of specifying the maximum period for which 
 
3 Section 4 re-numbered as sub-section (1) by Act 48 of 1986, section 3 ( w.e.f . 8th 
March, 1976). 
 
4 Words and brackets “drawing wages (being wages, not including any commission)” 
omitted by Sec. 3 (a) ibid. 
5 Ins. by Act. 48 of 1986, sectiton 3 (b) ( w.e.f. 8th March, 1976) 
 

 
3
such cash compensation shall be payable), in respect of the earned leave by him and not 
availed of. 
 
(5) Where a sales promotion employee dies while in service, his heirs shall be 
entitled to cash compensation for the earned leave earned by him and not availed of. 
 
(6) The cash compensation which will be payable to a sales promotion employee 
or, as the case may be, his heirs in respect of any period of earned leave for which he or 
his heirs, as the case may be, is or are entitled to cash compensation under sub-section (4) 
or sub-section(5), as the case, may be, shall be an amount equal to the wages due to such 
sales promotion employee for such period.] 
 
 
5. Issue of appointment letter.- Every employer in relation to a sales promotion 
employee shall furnish to such employee a letter of appointment, in such form as may be 
prescribed. 
 
 
(a) in a case where he holds appointment as such at the commencement of 
 
this Act, within three months of such commencement ; and 
 
 
(b) in any other case, on his appointment as such. 
 
 
6. Application of certain Acts to sales promotion employees.- (1) The 
provisions of the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923, as in force for the time being, 
shall apply to, or in relation to sales promotion employees as they apply to, or in relation 
to, workmen within the meaning of that Act. 
 
6[(2) The provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), as in force 
for the time being, shall apply to, or in relation to, sales promotion employees as they 
apply to, or in relation to, workmen, within the meaning of that Act and for the purpose 
of any proceeding under that Act in relation to an industrial dispute, a sale promotion 
employee shall be deemed to include a sale promotion employee who has been dismissed, 
discharged or retrenched in connection with, or as a consequence of, that dispute or 
whose dismissal, discharge, or retrenchment had led to that dispute.] 
 
 
(3) The provisions of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (11 of 1948), as in force for 
the time being, shall apply to, or in relation to , sales promotion employees as they apply 
to, or in relation to, employees within the meaning of that Act. 
 
(4) The provisions of the Maternity Benefit Act, 191 (53 of 1961), as in force for 
the time being, shall apply to, or in relation to, sales promotion employees, being women, 
as they apply to, or in relation to, women employed, whether directly or through any 
agency, for wages in any establishment within the meaning of that Act. 
 
(5) The provisions of the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 (21 of 1965), as in force 
for the time being, shall apply to, or in relation to, sales promotion employees as they 
apply to, or in relation to, employees within the meaning of that Act. 
 
(6) The provisions of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 (39 of 1972), as in force 
for the time being, shall apply to, or in relation to, sales promotion employees as they 
apply to, or in relation to, employees within the meaning of that Act. 
 
6 On the enforcement of section 24 of the Act 46 of 1982, sub-section (2) of section shall 
stand omitted (Not yet enforced). 

 
4
 
 7[(7) notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub-sections,- 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) in the application of any Act referred to in any of the said sub-sections to 
sales promotion employees, the wages of a sales promotion employee for the 
purposes of such Act, shall be deemed to be his wages as computed in accordance 
with the provisions of theis Act; 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) where an Act referred to in any of the said sub-sections provides for a 
ceiling limit as to wages so as to exclude from the purview of the application of 
such Act, persons whose wages exceed such ceiling limit, such Act shall not 
apply to any sales promotion employee whose wages as computed in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act exceed such ceiling limit.] 
 
 
 
7. Maintenance of registers.-Every employer in relation to an 
establishment shall keep and maintain such registers and other documents and 
in such manner as may be prescribed. 
 
 
 
 
8. Inspectors.- (1) The State Government may, by notification in the official 
Gazette, appoint such persons as it thinks fit to be Inspectors for the purposes of this Act 
and may define the local limits within which they shall exercise their functions. 
 
 
 
(2) Any Inspector appointed under sub-section (1) may, for the purpose of 
ascertaining whether any of the provisions of this Act have been complied with in respect 
of an establishment,- 
 
 
(a) require an employer to furnish such information as he may consider 
necessary; 
 
 
(b) at any reasonable time enter in the establishment or any premises 
connected therewith and require any one found in charge thereof to produce 
before him for examination any registers and other documents relating to the 
employment of sales promotion employees; 
 
 
(c) examine with respect to any matter relevant to any of the purposes 
aforesaid, the employer, his agent or servant or any other person in charge of the 
establishment or any premises connected therewith or any person whom the 
Inspector has reasonable cause to believe to be or to have been a sales promotion 
employee in the establishment : 
 
 
(d) make copies of or take extracts from any register or other documents 
maintained in relation to the establishment under this Act. 
 
 
(e) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed. 
 
 
 
(3) Every Inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of 
Sec. 21 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (45 of 1860). 
 
 
 
7 Ins. By Act 48 of 1986, section 4 (w.e.f. 6th May, 1987) 

 
5
 
(4) Any person required to produce any register or other document or to give 
information by an Inspector under sub-section (2) shall be legally bound to do so. 
 
 
9. Penalty.- If any employer contravenes the provisions of section 4 or section 5 
or section 7 or any rules made under this Act, he shall be punished with fine which may 
extended to one thousand rupees. 
 
 
10. Offences by companies.- (1) Where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was 
in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the 
company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall 
be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly : 
 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person 
liable to any punishment provided in this section, if he proves that the offence was 
committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the 
commission of such offence. 
 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence 
under this Act has been committed by a company an it is proved that the offence has been 
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part 
of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, 
manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of such offence and 
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
 
(3) For the purpose of this section,- 
 
 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other 
association of individuals; and 
 
 
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
 
 
11. Cognizance of offence.- (1) 
No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan 
Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence punishable under this 
Act. 
 
(2) No court shall take cognizance of an offence under this Act, unless the 
complaint thereof is made within six months of the date on which the offence is alleged 
to have been committed. 
 
 
8[11.A Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with this Act.- (1) The 
provisions of this Act or of any rule made thereunder shall have effect, notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law or in the terms of any award, 
agreement, settlement or contract of service, whether made before or after the coming 
into force of this Act : 
 
Provided that where under any such law, award, agreement, settlement, or 
contract or service, a sales promotion employee is entitled to benefits in respect of any 
matter which are more favourable to him than those to which he would be entitled under 
this Act, the sales promotion employee shall continue to be entitled to the more favorably 
 
8 Ins. by Act 69 of 1982, section 2. 
 

 
6
benefits in respect of that matter, notwithstanding that he is entitled to receive benefits in 
respect of other matters under this Act. 
 
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed to preclude a sales promotion 
employee from entering into an agreement with this employer for granting him rights or 
privileges in respect to any matter which are more favourable to him than those to which 
be would be entitled under this Act. 
 
12. Power to make rules.- (1) The Central Government may, by notification in 
the official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, 
such rules may provide for- 
 
 
(a) The kinds of leave that may be granted to a sales promotion employee 
9[the limit upto which he may accumulate earned leave, the limit up to which he 
may avail of earned leave at a time and the reasons for which such limit may be 
exceeded, the conditions and restrictions subject to which he may be entitled to 
cash compensation] under section 4: 
 
 
(b) the form of the letter of appointment to be furnished under section 5 : 
 
 
(c) the registrar and other documents to be kept and maintained under section 
7 and the manner in which such registers and other documents may be kept and 
maintained; 
 
 
(d) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed. 
 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for 
a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session or the successive session aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything preciously done under that rule. 
 
 
 
 
 
9 Ins. by Act 48 of 1986, Sec. 5 (w.e.f. 8th March, 1976).